, VOL 1 ***




Produced by Sonya Schermann, Les Galloway and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






[Illustration: BICHAT. X

_Published by Richardson & Lord, Boston._]




                           GENERAL ANATOMY,

                              APPLIED TO

                       PHYSIOLOGY AND MEDICINE;

                           BY XAVIER BICHAT,

       PHYSICIAN OF THE GREAT HOSPITAL OF HUMANITY AT PARIS, AND
                 PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY.

                      Translated from the French.

                        BY GEORGE HAYWARD, M.D.

         FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES,
               AND OF THE MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL SOCIETY.

                       _IN THREE VOLUMES._

                             VOLUME I.

                            _BOSTON_:
                   PUBLISHED BY RICHARDSON AND LORD.

                       J. H. A. FROST, PRINTER.
                                 1822.




DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS, _to wit_:

  DISTRICT CLERK'S OFFICE.

Be it remembered, that on the seventeenth day of April, A. D. 1822,
in the forty-sixth year of the Independence of the United States of
America, _Richardson & Lord_, of the said District, have deposited
in this office the title of a book, the right whereof they claim as
proprietors, in the words following, _to wit_:

"General Anatomy, applied to Physiology and Medicine; by Xavier Bichat,
Physician of the Great Hospital of Humanity at Paris, and Professor of
Anatomy and Physiology. Translated from the French, by George Hayward,
M. D. Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and of the
Massachusetts Medical Society. In three Volumes. Volume I."

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States,
entitled, "An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by securing the
Copies of Maps, Charts and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of
such Copies, during the times therein mentioned:" and also to an Act
entitled, "An Act supplementary to an Act, entitled, An Act for the
encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts and
Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies during the times
therein mentioned; and extending the Benefits thereof to the Arts of
Designing, Engraving and Etching Historical and other Prints."

  JOHN W. DAVIS,
  _Clerk of the District of Massachusetts_.




PREFACE BY THE TRANSLATOR.


I commenced the present translation while pursuing the study of
medicine in Paris in the winter of 1813-14. It was then my intention
to have completed and published it immediately upon my return to the
United States; but I learnt in England in the spring following, that
a translation of this work was about to appear from the London press.
This information induced me to abandon my undertaking, but after
waiting more than six years for the appearance of the English edition,
and finding from letters received from London, that there was but
little if any expectation of its being published there at all, I was
led to pursue my original plan and complete the translation which I
now offer to the public. In doing this, I was influenced more by the
intrinsic value of Bichat's work than by any and every other motive. I
was unwilling that so many of my professional brethren should be any
longer denied access to this admirable production, because it was in
a foreign language, and though I could have wished that another had
undertaken the task, yet I was resolved to go through the labour rather
than it should not be performed at all.

Some of the writings of Bichat are so well known and so justly
appreciated in this country, that it is perhaps unnecessary for
me to speak of his merits as an author, or offer an apology for
translating the present work. Every thing which he gave to the public
bore unequivocal proofs of being the production of a mind of the most
original and powerful cast, and it is impossible to estimate what
the influence of his labours might have been upon medical science if
a longer career had been permitted to him. As it was, he accomplished
much, and as his writings are more known, their influence will be more
sensibly felt. His manner of investigating physiological subjects was
characteristic of his strong and original mind, and it is difficult
to determine which is the most admirable, his acute and accurate
reasoning, or his ingenious and well conducted experiments. Nor were
these experiments the result of preconceived opinions, he seems to
have brought his mind perfectly unbiassed to every subject that he
investigated, and to have been guided in every instance by the most
rigorous laws of induction. To these high qualifications he added
great perspicuity in his arrangement, remarkable purity and beauty of
style, and an extensive knowledge of disease, which enabled him to
enrich his work with much valuable practical information. It is not
pretended, but that his experiments upon living animals may have in
some few cases led him to erroneous conclusions, but how numerous were
the instances in which he obtained from them the most satisfactory and
important information. It has, I know, become fashionable of late to
undervalue these experiments, and to deny that any useful application
can be made of them. It is no doubt true, that the sufferings which
animals sometimes undergo in these experiments, are such as to destroy
entirely the order and regularity of all the functions, and of course
to prevent us from determining any thing as to these functions in
health. This probably was the case with some of the experiments of
Magendie on vomiting, and Legallois on the principle of life; but let
us not condemn this mode of investigation because it has been sometimes
injudiciously employed, let us not forget that the argument is wholly
directed against the abuse of it, and that these experiments have
already led to some practical consequences of immense value. Would the
carotid artery have ever been tied in a living human subject, if it had
not been first ascertained that it could be done with safety in animals?

In translating this work, I have studiously endeavoured to give with
precision the meaning of the author, and have, I fear, by this means
frequently employed French idiomatic expressions. From the great
originality of many parts of the General Anatomy, Bichat found it
necessary in some instances to employ new terms, to which there were
no corresponding words in our language; in such cases, I have either
made use of several, or adopted the term, as one or the other seemed
best calculated to render the meaning more clear and exact. A few notes
only have been given, and these for the most part for the purpose of
explaining what was obscure, rather than of controverting any thing
contained in the original. Upon the whole, I trust that this work will
be a valuable acquisition to our stock of medical literature, and I
shall feel as if my labour has not been in vain, if I shall have been
the means of making my countrymen better acquainted with the writings
of its illustrious author.

_Boston, April, 1822._




PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR.


The work which I now offer to the public, will appear to them new,
I trust, in three points of view; 1st, in the _plan_ that has been
adopted; 2d, in most of the _facts_ which it contains; and 3d, in the
_principles_ which constitute its doctrine.

1st. The _plan_ consists in considering separately and presenting with
all their attributes, each of the simple systems, which, by their
different combinations, form our organs. The basis of this plan is
anatomical, but the details that it embraces belong also to medicine
and physiology. It has nothing in common, but the name, with what has
been lately advanced upon the anatomy of systems; my Treatise on the
Membranes alone gives an outline of it.

2d. The _facts_ and observations in this work, in addition to what
is already known, form a very numerous series. I shall not give an
analysis of them; the reader will supply it, how little soever he may
know of works on Anatomy and Physiology. Experiments on living animals,
trials with different reagents on organized textures,[1] dissection,
examinations after death, observations upon man in health and disease,
these are sources whence I have drawn them, and they are the sources
of nature. I have not, however, neglected authors, those especially
who make the science of the animal economy a science of facts and
experiments.

 [1] I have in this and every other instance translated the French
 word _tissu_ by the English word _texture_. I know many writers have
 adopted the French term, but I think it unnecessary, to say the least,
 to employ a foreign word, when one of our own language can be used
 with quite as much precision. _Tr._

I will make but one remark upon the experiments contained in this work;
amongst them will be found a series upon the simple textures, which
I subjected successively to desiccation, putrefaction, maceration,
ebullition, stewing, and to the action of the acids and the alkalies.
It will be easily seen, that it was not the object of these experiments
to determine the composition, or ascertain the different elements, and
consequently give a chemical analysis of simple textures; for this
purpose they would have been insufficient; but their object was to
establish the distinctive characters of these simple textures, to show
that each has a peculiar organization, as each has a peculiar life, and
to prove by the different results which they gave, that the division
which I have adopted is not speculative, but that it rests upon the
diversity of their intimate structure. The different re-agents, which
I used, were only to assist me where the scalpel was insufficient, and
on this account, therefore, I presume these experiments will have some
influence upon Anatomy.

3d. The general _doctrine_ of this work has not precisely the character
of any of those which have prevailed in medicine. Opposed to that of
Boerhaave, it differs from that of Stahl and those authors who, like
him, refer every thing in the living economy, to a single principle,
purely speculative, ideal, and imaginary, whether designated by the
name of _soul_, _vital principle_, or _archeus_. The general doctrine
of this work consists in analyzing with precision the properties
of living bodies, in showing that every physiological phenomenon
is ultimately referable to these properties considered in their
natural state; that every pathological phenomenon derives from them
augmentation, diminution, or alteration; that every therapeutic
phenomenon has for its principle the restoration of the part to the
natural type, from which it has been changed; in determining with
precision the cases in which each property is brought into action;
in distinguishing accurately in physiology as well as in medicine,
that which is derived from one, and that which flows from others; in
ascertaining by rigorous induction the natural and morbific phenomena
which the animal properties produce, and those which are derived
from the organic; and in pointing out when the animal sensibility
and contractility are brought into action, and when the organic
sensibility and the sensible or insensible contractility. We shall be
easily convinced upon reflection, that we cannot precisely estimate
the immense influence of the vital properties in the physiological
sciences, before we have considered these properties in the point of
view in which I have presented them. It will be said, perhaps, that
this manner of viewing them is still a theory; I will answer, that it
is a theory like that which shows in the physical sciences, gravity,
elasticity, affinity, &c. as the primitive principles of the facts
observed in these sciences. The relation of these properties as causes
to the phenomena as effects, is an axiom so well known in physics,
chemistry, astronomy, &c. at the present day, that it is unnecessary
to repeat it. If this work establishes an analogous axiom in the
physiological sciences, its object will be attained.




GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


There are in nature two classes of beings, two classes of properties,
and two classes of sciences. The beings are either organic or
inorganic, the properties vital or non-vital, and the sciences
physiological or physical. Animals and vegetables are organic—minerals
are inorganic. Sensibility and contractility are vital properties;
gravity, elasticity, affinity, &c. are non-vital properties. Animal and
vegetable physiology, and medicine form the physiological sciences;
astronomy, physics, chemistry, &c. are the physical sciences. These two
classes of sciences have relation only to different phenomena; there
are two other classes that correspond to these, which relate to the
internal and external forms of bodies and their description. Botany,
anatomy, and zoology, are the sciences of organic bodies; mineralogy,
&c. of the inorganic. The first will occupy us, and we shall fix our
attention especially upon the relations of living bodies with one
another, and their relations with those that do not live.

I. _General remarks upon physiological and physical sciences._

The differences between these sciences are derived essentially from
those existing between the properties that preside over the phenomena,
which are the object of each class of sciences. So immense is the
influence of these properties, that they are the principle of all
phenomena; whether we examine those of astronomy, of hydraulics, of
dynamics, of optics, of acoustics, &c. we shall finally arrive by a
connexion of causes to gravity, to elasticity, &c. as the end of our
researches. So the vital property is the primum mobile to which we must
ascend, whether we consider the phenomena of respiration, of digestion,
of secretion, circulation, inflammation, fevers, &c.—In giving
existence to every body, nature has imprinted upon it a certain number
of properties, that particularly characterize it, and by means of
which it contributes in its own manner, to all the phenomena that are
developed, succeed, and continually connect themselves in the universe.
Cast your eyes upon that which surrounds you; turn them upon objects
the most distant; whether, aided by the telescope, they examine those
that swim in space, or, armed with the microscope, they enter the world
of those, whose minuteness almost evades our view, every where you will
find on one side physical properties, on the other vital properties,
brought into action; every where you will see inert bodies gravitating
upon each other, and reciprocally attracting; living bodies gravitate
also, but above all they feel, and possess a motion which they owe only
to themselves.

These properties are so inherent in bodies, that we cannot conceive of
their existence without them. They constitute their essence and their
attribute. To exist and to enjoy them are two things inseparable.
Suppose that of a sudden they are deprived of them; instantly all the
phenomena of nature cease, and matter alone exists. Chaos was only
matter without properties; to create the universe, God endowed it with
gravity, elasticity, affinity, &c. and to a part he gave sensibility
and contractility.

This mode of considering the vital and physical properties,
sufficiently shews, that we cannot ascend above them in our
explanations, that they afford the principles, and that these
explanations are to be deduced from them as consequences. The physical
sciences, as well as the physiological, then, are composed of two
things; 1st. the study of phenomena, which are effects; 2d. the
research into the connexions that exist between them and the physical
or vital properties, which are the causes.

For a long time these sciences have not been so considered; every fact
that was observed, was made the subject of a particular hypothesis.
Newton was the first to remark, that however variable the physical
phenomena were, they could all be referred to a certain number of
principles. He analyzed these principles and found that attraction
enjoyed the most important place among them. Attracted by each other
and by their sun, the planets describe their eternal courses; attracted
to the centre of our system, the waters, air, stones, &c. move or tend
to move towards it: it is truly a sublime idea, and one that serves as
the basis to all the physical sciences. Let us render homage to Newton;
he was the first who discovered the secret of the Creator, viz. A
simplicity of causes reconciled with a multiplicity of effects.

The epoch of this great man was the most remarkable of human wisdom.
Since that period, we have had principles from which we draw facts as
consequences. This epoch, so advantageous to the physical sciences,
was nothing to the physiological; what do I say? it retarded their
progress. Mankind soon saw nothing but attraction and impulse in the
vital phenomena.

Boerhaave, though brilliant in genius, suffered himself to be dazzled
by a system which misled all the men of learning of his age, and which
made a revolution in the physiological sciences, that may be compared
to that effected in the physical, by the vortices of Descartes. The
plausibility of the theory and the celebrated name of its author, gave
to this revolution an empire, which, though rotten in its foundation,
was not easily overthrown.

Stahl, less brilliant than profound, rich in the means that convince,
though deficient in those that please, formed for the physiological
sciences an epoch more worthy of notice than that of Boerhaave. He
perceived the discordance between the physical laws and the functions
of animals; this was the first step towards the discovery of the vital
laws, but he did not discover them. The soul was to him every thing in
the phenomena of life; it was much to neglect attraction and impulse.
Stahl perceived that these were not true, but the truth escaped him.
Many authors, following his steps, have referred to a single principle,
differently denominated by each, all the vital phenomena. This, called
the vital principle by Barthez, archeus by Van Helmont, &c. is a
speculation that has no more reality than that which would refer to
a single principle all the physical phenomena. Among these we know
that some are derived from gravity, some from elasticity, others from
affinity, &c. The same in the living economy, some are derived from
sensibility, others from contractility.

Unknown to the ancients, the laws of life have begun to be understood
during the last age only. Stahl had already remarked the tonic
motions, but he did not generalize their influence. Haller was engaged
particularly with sensibility and irritability; but in limiting one to
the nervous system, and the other to the muscular, this great man did
not consider them in the correct point of view; he made them almost
insulated properties. Vicq d'Azyr changed them into functions in his
physiological division and ranked them with ossification, digestion,
&c. that is, he confounded the principle with the consequence. Thus you
see, notwithstanding the labours of a crowd of learned men, how much
the physiological sciences still differ from the physical. In these,
the chemist refers all the phenomena that he observes to affinity:
the natural philosopher, in his science, every where sees gravity,
elasticity, &c. In the others, we have not as yet ascended, at least
in a general manner, from the phenomena to the properties from which
they are derived. Digestion, circulation, or the sensations, do not
bring the idea of sensibility or contractility to the mind of the
physiologist, as the movement of a watch proves to the mechanician
that elasticity is the primum mobile of its motion; or as the wheel of
a mill or of any machine, which running water sets in motion, proves
to the natural philosopher that gravity is the cause. To place upon
the same level in this respect these two classes of sciences, it is
evidently necessary to form a just idea of vital properties. If their
limits are not accurately assigned, we cannot with precision analyze
their influence. I shall present here only general considerations on
this point, which has been treated sufficiently in my Researches upon
Life; what I shall add now will be but as a supplement to what has been
explained in that work.

II. _Of vital properties, and their influence upon all the phenomena of
the physiological sciences._

To assign the limits of these properties, we must follow them from
bodies that are hardly developed, to those which are the most perfect.
In the plants that seem to form the transition from vegetables to
animals, you discover only an internal motion that is scarcely real;
their growth is as much by the affinity of particles and consequently
by juxta-position, as by a true nutrition. But in ascending to
vegetables better organized, you see them continually pervaded by
fluids, that circulate in numerous capillary canals, which mount,
descend, and run in a thousand different directions, according to
the state of the forces that regulate them. This continual motion
of fluids is foreign to the physical properties, the vital ones only
direct it. Nature has endowed every portion of a vegetable with a
faculty of feeling the impression of fluids, with which their fibres
are in contact, and of reacting upon them in an insensible manner,
to favour their course. The first of these faculties I call organic
sensibility, the other, insensible organic contractility. This is very
obscure in most vegetables; it is the same in the bones of animals.
These two properties govern not only the vegetable circulations, which
correspond in some measure to the capillary system of animals, but
also the secretion, absorption, and exhalation of vegetables. Remark,
in fine, that these bodies have only functions relative to their
properties; that all the phenomena that animals derive from properties
which they have more than vegetables, as the great circulation and
digestion, for which there must be sensible organic contractility;
as the sensations, for which there must be animal sensibility;
and locomotion, the voice, &c. for which animal contractility is
necessary; remark, I say, that these functions are essentially foreign
to vegetables, since they have not vital properties to place them in
action.

For the same reason the catalogue of their diseases is less extensive.
They have not the class of nervous diseases, in which the animal
sensibility takes so great a part; they have not those of convulsions
or paralysis, which are formed by an augmented or diminished animal
contractility; they have not those of fevers, or gastric diseases,
which evidently arise from a disorder in the sensible organic
contractility. The diseases of vegetables are tumours of various kinds,
increased exhalations, marasmus, &c.; they all indicate a derangement
in the organic sensibility and in the corresponding insensible
contractility.

If we pass from vegetables to animals, we see the lowest of these,
the zoophites, receive into a sac, which is alternately filled and
emptied, the aliments that are to nourish them; we see them begin to
unite sensible organic contractility or irritability to the properties
which they have in common with vegetables, and consequently commence
the performance of different functions, digestion in particular.

Thus far the organized bodies live wholly within themselves; they have
no relation with that which surrounds them; animal life is wanting
in them, or at least if it has commenced in these animo-vegetables,
its rudiments are so obscure that we can hardly discover them. But
this life begins to display itself in the superior classes, in worms,
insects, mollusca, &c. On the one hand, the sensations, and on the
other, locomotion, which is inseparable from them, are more or less
fully developed. Then the vital properties necessary to the exercise of
these new functions, are added to the preceding. Animal sensibility and
contractility, obscure in the lower species, become more perfect, as
we approach quadrupeds, and locomotion and the sensations become also
more extensive. Sensible organic contractility then increases, and in
proportion to that, digestion, circulation of the great vessels, &c.
which are governed by it, receive a development which is constantly
growing more perfect.

If we strictly examine the immense series of living bodies, we shall
see the vital properties gradually augmenting in number and energy,
from the lowest of plants to the first of animals, man; we shall see
the lowest plants obedient to vital and physical properties; all plants
are governed only by these, which, in them, consist of insensible
contractility and organic sensibility; the lowest animals begin to add
sensible organic contractility to these properties, afterwards animal
sensibility and contractility. We know the expression of Linnæus,
which he has used to characterize minerals, vegetables, and animals.
The following would be more correct: 1st. physical properties for
minerals; 2d. physical properties and organic vital properties,
except[2] sensible contractility, for vegetables; 3d. physical
properties, all the organic vital properties, and the animal vital
properties, for animals.

 [2] Several plants certainly possess a considerable degree of sensible
 organic contractility; the mimosa pudica (sensitive plant) is a
 well known example, though there are several others that enjoy this
 property to almost as great an extent; particularly the hedysarum
 gyrans, the oxalis sensitiva, and the berberis vulgaris. "A very
 remarkable degree of irritability, not exceeded by the sensitive
 plant, exists in the flowers of the barberry, (berberis vulgaris.)
 When these are fully expanded, the stamens are found spread out on
 the inside of the corolla. In this situation, if the inside of the
 filament be touched with a pin or straw, it instantly contracts and
 throws the anther violently against the stigma. This fact, which has
 been particularly described by Dr. Smith, in the English barberry,
 is not less remarkable and distinct in the American varieties of the
 shrub." Bigelow's Florula Bostoniensis. _Tr._

Man and the neighbouring species, which are the particular object of
our researches, enjoy then evidently, all the vital properties, some of
which belong to organic life, the others to animal life. 1st. Organic
sensibility and insensible contractility have all the phenomena of
the capillary circulation, of secretion, of absorption, exhalation,
nutrition, &c. evidently dependant upon them in a state of health.
In treating, therefore, of these functions, we must always ascend to
these properties. In the state of disease, all the phenomena that
suppose a disorder in these functions, are clearly derived from an
injury of these properties. Inflammation, formation of pus, induration,
resolution, hemorrhage, unnatural augmentation or suppression of
secretions; increased exhalation, as in dropsies; diminished, or wholly
wanting, as in adhesions; absorption, disordered in some way or other;
nutrition, altered more or less, or presenting unnatural phenomena,
as in the formation of tumours, cysts, cicatrices, &c.: these are
morbid symptoms, that evidently suppose some injury or disorder in
these two preceding properties. 2d. Sensible organic contractility,
which, like the preceding, is not separated from the sensibility of the
same nature, governs especially in a state of health, the movements
necessary to digestion and the circulation of the great vessels, at
least for the red and black blood of the general system, for the
excretion of urine, &c. In the state of disease, all the phenomena of
vomiting, of diarrhœas, and a great part of those numberless ones of
the pulse, may ultimately be referred to a disorder of the sensible
organic contractility. 3d. All the external sensations, those of
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling, and the internal, as
those of hunger, thirst, &c. are derived in a state of health from
the animal sensibility. In disease, what part does not this property
perform? Pain and its innumerable modifications, itching, smarting,
tickling, the sensation of heaviness, weight, lassitude, throbbing,
pricking, pulling, &c. &c. are not these only different alterations of
animal sensibility? A hundred different words would not express the
diversity of painful sensations that morbid affections bring with them.
4th. Animal contractility is the principle of locomotion and the voice;
convulsions, spasms, palsies, &c. are derived from an augmentation or
diminution of this property. Examine all the physiological and all the
pathological phenomena, and you will see that there is no one which
cannot be ultimately referred to some one of the properties of which
I have just spoken. The undeniable truth of this assertion, brings us
to a conclusion not less certain in the treatment of diseases, viz.
that every curative method should have for its object the restoration
of the altered vital properties to their natural type. Every remedy,
which, in local inflammation, does not diminish the augmented organic
sensibility; which, in œdema and dropsy, does not increase this
weakened property; and which does not reduce animal contractility in
convulsions, and elevate it in paralysis, fails in its object, and is
contraindicated.

To what errors have not mankind been led in the employment and
denomination of medicines? They created deobstruents, when the theory
of obstruction was in fashion, and incisives, when that of the
thickening of the humours prevailed. The expressions of diluents and
attenuants, and the ideas that are attached to them, were common before
this period. When it was necessary to blunt the acrid particles, they
created inviscants, incrassants, &c. Those who saw in diseases only a
relaxation or tension of the fibres, the _laxum_ and _strictum_ as they
called it, employed astringents and relaxants. Refrigerant and heating
remedies were brought into use by those who had a special regard in
diseases to an excess or a deficiency of caloric. The same identical
remedies have been employed under different names according to the
manner in which they were supposed to act. Deobstruent in one case,
relaxant in another, refrigerant in another, the same medicine has been
employed with all these different and opposite views; so true is it
that the mind of man gropes in the dark, when it is guided only by the
wildness of opinion.

There has not been in the materia medica, a general system; this
science has been governed by the different theories that have
successively predominated in medicine; each has, if I may so express
myself, flowed back upon it. Hence the vagueness and uncertainty
that it presents at this day. An incoherent assemblage of incoherent
opinions, it is perhaps of all the physiological sciences, that
which best shows the caprice of the human mind. What do I say? It is
not a science for a methodical mind, it is a shapeless assemblage
of inaccurate ideas, of observations often puerile, of deceptive
remedies, and of formulæ as fantastically conceived as they are
tediously arranged. It has been said that the practice of medicine was
disgusting; I add further, that it is not in some respects the study
of a reasonable man, when its principles are derived from the greatest
part of the works on the materia medica. Take away those medicines, the
effect of which is known only by accurate observation, as evacuants,
diuretics, sialagogues, anti-spasmodics, &c. those consequently that
act upon a particular function; what knowledge have we of the remainder?

It is, without doubt, extremely difficult at present to class remedies
according to their modus operandi; but it is undeniable that all have
for their object, the restoration of the vital forces to the natural
type, from which they have been driven by disease. Since the morbid
phenomena may be considered as different alterations of these forces,
the action of remedies should also be viewed as the means by which
these alterations are to be brought back to the natural type. Upon this
principle, each of the properties has its class of appropriate remedies.

1st. We have seen that there is in inflammations an increase of organic
sensibility and insensible contractility; diminish then this increase
by cataplasms, fomentations, and local baths. In some dropsies, in
white-swellings, &c. there is a diminution of these properties; raise
them by the application of wine and all those substances that are
called tonics. In every species of inflammation, suppuration, tumours
of different kinds, ulcers, obstructions; in every alteration of
secretion, exhalation, or nutrition, the remedies act peculiarly upon
the insensible contractility, to increase, diminish, or alter it in
some way. All those that are called resolvents, tonics, stimulants,
emollients, &c. act upon this property. Observe, that these remedies
are of two kinds: 1st. general; as wine, ferruginous substances,
oftentimes the acids, &c.; these re-animate insensible contractility,
and give tone to the whole system: 2d. particular; thus this property
is separately excited by nitre in the kidnies, mercury in the salivary
glands, &c.

2d. Many remedies act particularly upon the sensible organic
contractility; such are emetics, which produce a contraction of the
stomach; cathartics, and drastics especially, which create a strong
contraction of the intestines. Art does not excite the heart in the
same manner as these viscera; we do not artificially increase its
movements as we do those of the stomach in gastric diseases. It will,
perhaps, hereafter be attempted, especially if it is true that fever
may often be a method of cure, and then it will not, I think, be
difficult to find the means of effecting it. At other times, we have
to diminish sensible organic contractility, and then remedies are
employed that act in a manner opposite to the preceding, as in stopping
vomitings, in diminishing intestinal irritation, &c.

3d. Animal sensibility has also remedies that are peculiar to it.
But they act in two ways—1st. in diminishing pain in the part where
it is seated, as different applications upon tumours, obstructions,
&c.: 2d. in acting upon the brain that perceives the pain; thus all
narcotic preparations, taken internally, remove the sensation of pain,
while the cause still subsists. In cancer of an ulcerated uterus, the
disease continues its progress with activity, but the prudent physician
stupifies the brain so much, that it is incapable of perceiving it. It
is essential to distinguish accurately these two actions of remedies
upon the animal sensibility. They are totally different from each other.

4th. Medicinal substances have also their influence on animal
contractility. Every thing that produces an active excitement on the
external surface of the body, as vesicatories, frictions, smarting,
&c. tends to re-animate in paralysis this benumbed faculty. All those
substances that paralyze the cerebral action, prevent the brain from
governing the muscles of animal life; when these muscles, therefore,
are convulsively agitated, these substances are true anti-spasmodics.

In presenting these observations, I do not mean to offer a new plan
for the materia medica. Medicines are too complicated in their action
to be arranged anew, without more reflection than I profess as yet to
have bestowed on the subject. Moreover, an inconvenience common to
every classification, would here present itself: the same medicine
acts often upon many vital properties. An emetic, while it brings into
action the sensible organic contractility of the stomach, excites the
insensible contractility of the mucous glands, and oftentimes the
animal sensibility of the nervous villi. The same observation may be
made with regard to the stimulants of the bladder, of the intestines,
&c. My only object is to show, that in the action of substances applied
to the body to heal it, as in the phenomena of diseases, every thing
must be referred to the vital properties, and that their augmentation,
diminution, or alteration, are ultimately the invariable object of our
curative method.

Some authors have considered diseases only as increased strength
or weakness, and have consequently divided medicines into tonics
and debilitants. This idea is true in part, but it is false when we
generalize it too much. For every vital force there are means proper
to raise it when too much diminished, and to lessen it when too much
elevated. But tonics and debilitants are certainly not applicable to
every case. You would not weaken animal contractility, augmented in
convulsions, as you would insensible organic contractility increased
in inflammation; neither would you increase them by the same means.
The morbid phenomena that organic contractility and animal sensibility
experience, are not cured by the same method. There are medicines
proper for each vital force. Moreover, it is not only in increase or
diminution that the vital forces err, but they are besides disordered;
the different modifications that insensible contractility and organic
sensibility can undergo, produce in wounds and ulcers a diversity of
suppuration, in glands a diversity of secretion, in exhaling surfaces
a diversity of exhalations, &c. It is necessary, therefore, that
medicines should not only diminish or increase each of the vital
forces, but that they should moreover restore them to the natural
modification from which they have been altered.

What I have just said is particularly applicable to the strictum and
laxum of many authors, who every where see but these two things.
The strictum may be properly applied to inflammation, the laxum to
dropsies, &c.; but what have these two states of the organs in common
with convulsions, with disorder of the intellect, with epilepsy, with
bilious affections, &c.? It is the peculiarity of those who have a
general theory in medicine, to endeavour to bend every phenomenon to
it. The fault of generalizing too much, has been perhaps more injurious
to science, than that of viewing each phenomenon separately.

These observations are, I think, sufficient to show, that every where
in the physiological sciences, in the physiology of vegetables and
of animals, in pathology, in therapeutics, &c. there are vital laws,
that govern the phenomena which are the object of these sciences; and
that there is not one of these phenomena that does not flow from these
essential and fundamental laws, as from its source.

If I should take a survey of all the divisions of physical sciences,
you would see that the physical laws were ultimately the sole principle
of all their phenomena; but this is so well known that it is not
necessary to do it. I will consider an important subject, and one to
which we are naturally led by the preceding observations. I mean, a
parallel between physical and vital phenomena, and consequently between
physical and physiological sciences.

III. _Characteristics of the vital properties, compared with those of
the physical._

When we consider, on one side, the phenomena which are the object
of the physical sciences, and those that are the object of the
physiological, we see how immense is the space that separates their
nature and their essence. But this difference arises from that which
exists between the laws of the one and the other.

Physical laws are constant and invariable; they are subject neither
to augmentation or diminution. A stone does not gravitate towards the
earth with more force at one time than another; in every case marble
has the same elasticity, &c. On the other hand, at every instant,
sensibility and contractility are increased, diminished, or altered;
they are scarcely ever the same.

It follows, therefore, that the physical phenomena are never variable,
that at all periods and under every influence they are the same; they
can, consequently, be foreseen, predicted, and calculated. We calculate
the fall of a heavy body, the motion of the planets, the course of a
river, the ascension of a projectile, &c.: the rule being once found,
it is only necessary to make the application to each particular case.
Thus heavy bodies fall always in a series of odd numbers; attraction is
in the inverse ratio of the square of the distances, &c. On the other
hand all the vital functions are susceptible of numerous variations.
They are frequently out of their natural state; they defy every kind
of calculation, for it would be necessary to have as many rules as
there are different cases. It is impossible to foresee, predict, or
calculate, any thing with regard to their phenomena; we have only
approximations towards them, and even these are often very uncertain.

There are two things in the phenomena of life, 1st. the state of
health; 2d. that of disease; hence there are two distinct sciences;
physiology considers the phenomena of the first state, pathology
those of the second. The history of the phenomena in which the vital
forces have their natural type, leads us to consider as a consequence,
those phenomena that take place when these forces are altered. But in
the physical sciences there is only the first history; the second is
never found. Physiology is to the movements of living bodies, what
astronomy, dynamics, hydraulics, hydrostatics, &c. are to those of
inert ones; but these last have no such correspondent sciences as
pathology. There is nothing in the physical sciences that corresponds
to therapeutics in the physiological. For the same reason, every idea
of medicament is absurd in the physical sciences. The object of a
medicament is the restoration of properties to their natural type; but,
the physical properties, never losing this type, have of course no need
of restoration.

We see then that the peculiar instability of the character of the
vital laws is the source of an immense series of phenomena, which
form a peculiar order of sciences. What would become of the universe,
if the physical laws were subject to the same commotions and the
same variations as the vital? Much has been said of the revolutions
of the globe, of the changes that the earth has undergone, of the
overthrows that ages have gradually brought about, and upon which ages
have accumulated without producing others: but you would see these
overthrows and these general commotions in nature at every instant, if
the physical properties had the same character as the vital.

For the same reason, that the phenomena and laws of the physical
and physiological sciences are unlike, the sciences themselves are
essentially different. The manner of presenting the facts and of
prying into their causes, the experimental art, &c. every thing bears
a different stamp; and it is absurd to confound them. As the physical
sciences were perfected before the physiological, mankind thought
that they could illustrate the latter by connecting them with the
former; but they have confused them; and this was inevitable, for the
application of the physical sciences to physiology, was the explication
of the phenomena of living bodies by the laws of the inert. Here then
is a false principle, and all the consequences drawn from it must be
erroneous. Let us leave to chemistry its affinity, and to physics
its elasticity and gravity, and let us employ in physiology only
sensibility and contractility; I except, however, those cases where the
same organ becomes the seat of vital and physical phenomena, as the
eye and the ear, for example. It is on this account, that the general
character of this work is wholly different from those on physiology,
and even that of the celebrated Haller. The works of Stahl illustrate
well the advantage of neglecting all those pretended accessory aids,
which overthrow the science in attempting to support it. But as this
great physician had not analyzed the vital properties, he could not
present their phenomena in their true point of view. Nothing is more
vague and indefinite than the words, _vitality_, _vital action_, _vital
influx_, &c. when we do not precisely limit their meaning. Suppose
that mankind had created some general and vague words, which were to
correspond to all the non-vital properties, and which gave no precise
or definite ideas; if you were every where to use these terms, if you
did not determine that which belonged to gravity, that which depended
on affinity, and that which was the result of elasticity, you would
never be understood. Let us say as much in regard to the physiological
sciences. The art is much indebted to many physicians of Montpellier
for having deserted the theory of Boerhaave, and having followed in
preference that given by Stahl. But in leaving a bad path, they have
taken another so tortuous, that they will never, I think, find its
termination.

Ordinary minds, in reading, stop at insulated facts that are presented;
they do not embrace, at one view, the principles of the work.
Oftentimes the author himself incautiously follows the impression given
to a science in the age in which he writes. But the man of genius every
where pauses at this impression, which should be henceforth entirely
different in physical and physiological works. It is necessary to use
a different language; for most of the words that are carried from the
physical into the physiological sciences, continually refer to ideas
that have no connexion with them. You see the living solids constantly
undergoing composition and decomposition, every moment taking and
rejecting new substances; on the other hand, inert bodies remain the
same, and keep the same constituent principles, until friction and
other causes destroy them. So in the elements of inert bodies, there is
a constant uniformity, and an invariable identity in their principles,
which is known when they have been once analyzed; whilst the principles
of the living fluids are so continually changing, that it is necessary
that many analyses should be made, under every possible circumstance.
We shall see the glands and exhaling surfaces pour out, according to
the degree of their vital forces, a great variety of modifications
of the same fluid; what do I say? they pour out a variety of fluids
really different; for are not the sweat and the urine poured out under
one circumstance, and the sweat and the urine under another, two
distinct fluids? There are a thousand examples that would incontestably
establish this assertion.

It is the nature of vital properties to exhaust themselves; time wastes
them. Elevated in the commencement of life, they remain stationary
at the adult age, and afterwards are debilitated and become nothing.
Prometheus, it is said, having formed some statues of men, snatched
fire from heaven to animate them. This fire is the emblem of the vital
properties; while it burns, life is supported; when it is extinguished,
it ceases. It is, then, a part of the essence of these properties, to
animate matter for a determinate time only; hence there are necessary
limits to life. On the other hand, the physical properties, constantly
inherent in matter, never abandon it; so that inert bodies have no
limits to their existence, but what accident gives to them.

By nutrition the particles of the matter of inanimate bodies pass into
living bodies, and vice versa; and we can evidently conceive that this
matter has been endowed through an immense series of ages with physical
properties. These properties are given to it at the creation, and will
leave it only when the world shall end. This matter, in passing into
living bodies, in the space that separates these two epochs, a space
that immensity only can bound, this matter, I say, becomes possessed,
at intervals, of vital properties, which are then united to physical
properties. Here, then, is a great difference in matter, with regard to
these two kinds of properties; one it enjoys by intermissions only, the
other it possesses constantly.

I could add many other considerations, that would still further
establish the difference between the physical and vital laws, and
consequently between the physical and vital phenomena, and as a
consequence from these, the difference of the general character and
methods of the physical and physiological sciences. I could show, that
inert bodies are formed at hazard, by juxta-position or a combination
of their particles, while living bodies, on the contrary, exist in
consequence of a certain function, viz. generation; that the first
increase in the same manner as they are formed, by juxta-position or
the combination of new particles; the others by an internal movement
of assimilation, which requires different preliminary functions;
these constantly experiencing composition and decomposition; those
remaining always internally in the same condition, undergo no other
modifications than such as are derived from chance and the physical
laws. The existence of inert bodies ceases as it commenced, by
mechanical laws, by friction, or by new combinations; living bodies
afford in their natural destruction, a phenomenon as uniform as in
their production; they pass suddenly to a new state when life abandons
them, and undergo putrefaction, desiccation, &c. which they did not
before, because the physical properties being restrained by the vital,
could not produce these phenomena; inert bodies, on the other hand,
always preserve the same modifications. Though a stone or a metal, when
broken or dissolved, ceases to exist, their particles will always be
the same. But some authors have already presented a great part of this
parallel; let us content ourselves with drawing from it a consequence
often deduced from other facts, I mean the difference of the laws that
preside over the two classes of functions.

But there is an essential difference between vital and physical
properties; I refer to sympathies.

All inert bodies show no communication in their different parts. Though
the extremity of a stone, or of a metal, may be altered in any way by
chemical dissolution, or by mechanical agents, the other parts are not
affected; it is necessary to touch them by a direct action. On the
contrary, every thing is so connected and tied together in the living
body, that no one part can be disordered in its functions, without
being immediately perceived by the rest. All physicians have known the
singular consent that exists between our different organs, both in a
state of health and disease, but principally in the latter. How easy
would be the study of diseases, if they were stripped of every thing
derived from sympathy! Who does not know that these complaints often
predominate over those that arise from the injury of the diseased
organ? Who does not know that the cause of sleep, of exhalation, of
absorption, of secretion, of vomiting, of diarrhœa, of retention of
urine, of convulsions, &c. is oftentimes very far from the brain, from
the exhalants, from the absorbents, from the glands, from the stomach,
from the intestines, from the bladder, from the voluntary muscles, &c.?

How little soever we reflect on the sympathetic phenomena, it will be
evident that they are only unnatural developments of vital forces which
are called into action in an organ by the influence that it receives
from those that have been directly excited. In this view all the
systems are dependant upon each other. This important point of doctrine
will be treated at so much length, in this work, particularly under the
article on the nervous system that it is useless to insist much upon it
here.

We shall see sympathies call into action always those vital properties
especially that prevail in a system; animal sensibility in the nerves,
contractility of the same kind in the voluntary muscles, insensible
organic contractility in the involuntary, sensible contractility in
the glands, in the serous, mucous, synovial, cutaneous surfaces, &c.
We shall see them assume the character of the vital properties of the
organs in which they are developed, their progress will be chronic in
the bones, cartilages, &c. acute in the muscles, skin, &c. We shall
see them observe in the frequency of their development, the laws of
nutrition and growth, to appear oftener in the nervous and vascular
system of the child, in the pulmonary organs in youth, and in the
abdominal contents in adult age. But let us pass to other subjects.


IV. _Of the vital properties and their phenomena, considered in
relation to the solids and fluids._

Every organized body is composed of fluids and of solids. The first
are, in one point of view, the materials, and in another the residue of
the second. 1st. They are the materials, for from the aliments which
convey through the intestines, the elements of nutrition, even to the
interior of the organs where these elements are deposited, they form
evidently a part of the chyle and the blood. 2d. They are the residue,
for after having remained some time in the organs, these nutritive
particles are taken up, enter again into the blood, and afterwards make
a part of the secreted fluids, and of those that form cutaneous and
mucous exhalations, which are thrown out externally.

There are then fluids for composition and others subservient to
decomposition. The solids are the termination of the first, which come
from without, and the place from which the second are sent back. The
fluids of composition and decomposition are not all insulated; the
chyle, the materials that enter by cutaneous absorption, the principles
that the lungs draw from the air, &c. are especially of the first
kind. The fluids secreted and exhaled upon the mucous and cutaneous
surfaces, appear to be exclusively of the second. But the blood is a
common centre, in which the elements that enter, and those that go out,
circulate together.

This being admitted, let us see what part the fluids and the solids
enjoy in the vital phenomena. This must evidently depend on the
properties they possess; and in reflecting on the vital properties
which we know, it is evident, that every idea of fluidity is foreign
to them, that fluidity cannot be the seat of any contraction nor of
organic and animal sensibility, &c. I will not speak here of the
pretended spontaneous movements of the blood, of the subtle fluids
that it contains, according to some authors, and which can on occasion
expand or contract it; all this is but an assemblage of vague ideas,
that are confirmed by no experiment. Moreover, all the phenomena of
the living economy show us manifestly the fluids in a state almost
passive, and the solids, on the other hand, always essentially
active. It is the solids that every where receive the excitement, and
act in consequence; the fluids are only the excitants. This constant
impression of the second upon the first, constitutes every where
continual sensations that are not referred to the brain, and which are
consequently not perceived; this is organic sensibility, and differs
from the animal in this, that the mind has no consciousness of these
sensations, which do not go beyond the organs in which they take place.

Since, on one side, the vital properties are essentially seated in the
solids, and on the other, the morbid phenomena are but alterations of
these properties, it is evident that these phenomena reside especially
in the solids, and that to a certain limit the fluids are foreign to
them. Every kind of pain, all spasms and irregular movements of the
heart, that constitute the innumerable variations of the pulse, have
their seat in the solids.

Let us not believe, however, that the fluids are nothing in diseases;
they oftentimes carry the fatal principle of them. They possess, then,
in disease, the same place as in the state of health, in which the
solids are the active agents of all the phenomena that we observe, but
their action is inseparable from that of the fluids. That the heart may
contract, that the capillary system may close itself, it is necessary
that fluids should first go there. In proportion as the fluids are
in their natural state, the excitement is natural; but when this is
changed from any cause, as by the introduction of foreign substances,
at that instant they become unnatural excitants; the functions are
disordered, and diseases supervene. You see, then, that the fluids can
oftentimes be the principle of diseases, and the vehicle of morbific
matter. But this subject merits further consideration.

Here we can apply the distinction of fluids into those of composition
and those of decomposition. The first, which enter the system in
various ways, go into the blood, which, on one account, belongs
to them, but on another, to the fluids of decomposition. It is
incontestable, 1st. that the chyle can be loaded with a variety of
foreign substances, and carry into the blood the fatal principles
of disease, as when putrid and badly digested matter, principles of
contagion mixed with our aliment, &c. are found in the primæ viæ.
2d. Is it not established by many proofs, that cutaneous absorption
oftentimes introduces into the blood the causes of disease, and, 3dly.
that substances foreign to the constituent principles of the air,
and adapted to excite disease, may accidentally get into that fluid
through the medium of the lungs? these things we cannot doubt. Here,
then, there are already three ways open to the principles of morbific
matter, as we shall moreover have reason to be convinced in the course
of this work. 4th. There is another accidental one, that arises from
wounds, cuts, bites, lacerations, &c. by means of which destructive
principles are oftentimes conveyed into the animal economy. Under these
four we might produce a variety of cases, in which the fluids are the
first causes of diseases, by conveying their essential principles and
becoming unnatural excitants to the solids, in which they produce
phenomena contrary to the natural order. But it is evident, that it is
those fluids especially destined to the composition of the organs that
thus carry morbific principles; these are especially their vehicle,
and convey the disease. On the other hand, the fluids destined to the
decomposition tend to carry the disease out of the system. We have seen
that these fluids are every where poured upon the mucous and cutaneous
surfaces, either by exhalation or secretion, as the sweat, the urine,
&c.: and it is by these fluids that a crisis is produced. Physicians
have exaggerated to an infinite degree the influence of these morbific
humours, thus driven out; but we cannot doubt that this doctrine
has oftentimes a real foundation. If these fluids are sometimes the
vehicles of disease, it is when they enter unnaturally into the system,
as when the bile passes into the mass of blood, when the absorbed urine
enters this fluid, &c.

After all that has just been said, it is evident, that it is necessary
to distinguish accurately diseases themselves, or rather the whole of
the symptoms that characterize them, according to the principles that
produce or support them. Almost all the symptoms are in the solids,
but the cause can be in them as well as in the fluids. An example
will render this more clear; the heart can contract unnaturally; 1st.
because its organic sensibility is increased whilst the blood itself
remains the same; 2d. because the blood is either augmented, as in
plethora, or altered in its nature, as in putrid fevers, &c. while the
organic sensibility of the heart does not vary. The excitement may
be double, or the organ may be twice as susceptible as common, the
effect is the same; an acceleration of the pulse takes place. The solid
always takes the principal part in the disease; it is always that which
contracts, but in the first case the cause was in the solid, in the
second it was not.

This example gives an idea of what occurs in diseases, in all of which
the solids are especially in action; but the cause of this action,
sometimes exists in them, and sometimes not. It is no doubt essentially
necessary to seek the distinction of these cases. The following
reflections are made with this view. 1st. I distinguish, in the present
question, diseases into two classes; 1st. into those which especially
affect animal life; 2d. into those that particularly disorder organic
life. I say particularly, for such is the connexion of these two lives,
that the one can hardly be altered without the other; thus fevers that
affect organic life, produce cerebral effects that agitate the animal:
thus also primitive cerebral affections influence sympathetically
the circulation, respiration, &c. But certainly we cannot deny, that
there are some affections, whose principal and primitive character is a
disorder of the animal life; such are convulsions, spasms, paralysis,
mania, epilepsy, catalepsy, &c. But it appears that the cause of these
diseases is almost always in the solids, and that the fluids most
commonly are not affected. Therefore you see that crises, in every case
are foreign to these diseases. Hypochondria, hysteria, melancholia,
&c. though they appear to reside more particularly in the solids, can
yet be in a degree dependant on the fluids, as different examples will
prove.

Diseases, on the other hand, that particularly affect organic life,
as fevers, inflammations, &c. may have their principle as well in the
fluids as in the solids. Hence the reason, that these diseases are
subject to crisis, and are cured by evacuants, alteratives, &c.

2dly. It is necessary in order to resolve the question of the affection
of the solids or the fluids in diseases, to distinguish their phenomena
into those which are sympathetic, and those that are the product
of a direct excitement. Every sympathetic phenomenon has its seat
essentially and necessarily inherent in the solids. In fine, the
solids alone act upon each other and correspond together by means yet
unknown. All sympathetic vomiting, febrile agitation of the heart,
exhalation, secretion, and absorption, arise from a change effected,
by the influence of a part more or less remote, in the solids of those
which are the seats of these phenomena. When cold acts upon the skin
covered with sweat, immediately the pleura becomes affected. If cold
water is conveyed into the stomach while the body is hot, an effect is
oftentimes produced upon a distant organ. This is sympathy, and not the
repercussion of the humours. In this work I have cited a great number
of examples of sympathy under each system; but in none of them I think
is it possible to conceive of an affection of the fluids.

3dly. The division of diseases into organic, or those which alter
the texture of the organs, and into those which leave this texture
untouched, is still essential here. The first have their seat evidently
in the solids.

4thly. The division into acute and chronic, ought not to be neglected
in resolving the problem.

5thly. In fine, it would be necessary to make another distinction not
less important, viz. that of diseases which are independent of every
principle inherent in the economy and of those which proceed from a
similar principle, as when the virus of the venereal, the tetters,
scrofula or scurvy predominates in the whole system, and alternately
attacks the different organs.

How little soever you may examine diseases under different points of
view, you will perceive that what is true of one class cannot be so of
another. It is evident from this, that it is improper to resolve this
question in a general manner, as it has been too often done, and that
a theory of diseases founded upon the principle of the affection of
the solids or fluids alone, is a pathological absurdity, equal to that
in physiology which would place in action the fluids or solids only.
I think there are two errors that should be equally feared, that of
particularizing and that of generalizing too much. The second leads us
to false conclusions as well as the first.

Though the vital properties reside especially in the solids, it is not
necessary to consider the fluids as entirely inert. It is undeniable,
that those of them which form the composition of the body, increase
in vitality as they advance from the aliments of which they are
formed, to the solids which they compose. The alimentary mass is less
animalized than the chyle, and this is less so than the blood. It
would undoubtedly be a subject of very curious research, to determine,
how the particles, from being foreign to the vital properties, and
enjoying only physical ones, become by degrees possessed of the
rudiments of the first. I say the rudiments, for certainly the vital
elaboration that the fluids experience in circulating as such in the
body, and before they penetrate the solids to become a part of them, is
the first degree of their vital properties. In the same manner, if you
should inject into this fluid the materials of those that are exhaled
or secreted, the exhalant and secretory organs would repulse these
materials, if life had not made them undergo a previous elaboration.

It is evidently impossible to say what this vitality of the fluids is;
its existence however is not less real, and the chemist who wishes to
analyze the fluids, has, like the anatomist who dissects the solids,
only the dead body upon which he can operate. You will observe, that
when the principle of life has left the fluids, they go immediately
into a state of putrefaction, and are decomposed like the solids,
deprived of their vital powers. This alone prevents that internal
movement, which undoubtedly enters much into the alterations of which
the fluids are susceptible. Observe what takes place after a meal;
ordinarily a slight increase of the pulse, the effect of the mixture
of the nutritive principles with the blood, is the consequence of
it. If you have made use of acrid or spicy aliments, to which you
are unaccustomed, a general heat, a thousand different sensations of
lassitude and heaviness, accompany digestion. Shall I speak of the
various kinds of wine, and their effects, even to intoxication? Who
has not a hundred times paid dearly for the pleasures of a repast
by a general disorder, an universal agitation, a heat in every part
during the whole time that the wine circulates with the blood? Who has
not observed that one kind of wine produces one effect and another a
different? The solids are then without doubt the seat of every thing
we experience; but is not the cause of it in the fluids? It is the
blood, which carrying with its own particles others that are foreign
to it, excites all the organs, and especially the brain, because there
is a particular relation between this viscus and spirituous liquors,
as there is between cantharides and the bladder, and mercury and the
salivary glands. That which I say is so true, that if you infuse wine
into the open vein of an animal, you will produce analogous effects.
The experiments made upon this subject are so well known that I have
not even repeated them.

I will relate a fact here which disproves what has lately been advanced
upon the incorruptibility of the blood in diseases. A short time since,
in examining a body at the Hôtel Dieu, with Mess. Péborde, l'Herminier,
and Bourdet, we found instead of the black abdominal blood, a real grey
sanies, which filled all the divisions of the splenic vein, the trunk
of the vena porta, and all the hepatic branches, so that by cutting the
liver in slices, we could distinguish by the flow of this sanies, all
the ramifications of the vena porta from those of the vena cava, which
contained ordinary blood. This body was so remarkable for its size,
that I do not recollect to have ever seen one equal to it. Certainly
this sanies was not the effect of death, and the blood had circulated,
if not thus altered, at least very different from its natural state,
and really decomposed.

Consider the immense influence of aliments upon health, structure, and
even character. Compare the people who live only on milk and vegetables
with those who are in the constant use of spirituous liquors. See how
alkohol, carried into the new world, has modified the manners and
habits of the savages; consider the slow and gradual influence of
regimen in chronic diseases, and you will perceive that in health, as
in disease, the alteration of the fluids is frequently before that of
the solids, which consequently become changed; for it is an inevitable
circle. But the alteration of the fluids appears to depend essentially
upon the mode of the mixture of parts not animalized with those that
are so.

We should have a very inaccurate idea of the mixture with the blood of
the foreign substances brought by the way of the intestines, the skin,
or the lungs, for the purposes of sanguification, if we compared it to
the mixture of inert substances, or chemical combinations. The blood
enjoys, if we may so say, the rudiments of organic sensibility; and
as the life which it enjoys places it more or less in relation to the
fluids that enter it, it is more or less disposed to combine with them
and to endow them with the life with which it is animated. Sometimes
it repulses for a long time substances that are foreign to it. I am
persuaded that a great number of the phenomena that we experience after
taking food, especially acrid substances, and spirituous liquors,
arises in part from the general disorder that the blood undergoes when
its vitality begins to communicate itself to these foreign substances
from the kind of struggle which takes place in the vessels, between
the living fluid and that which does not live. Thus we see all the
solids rise, as it were, against a stimulant they are unaccustomed to.
Who knows but that the vitality of the fluids has an influence upon
their motions? I think it is very probable. I doubt whether fluids
purely inert could, if they were alone in animated vessels, circulate
like living fluids. In the same manner, animated fluids could not
move themselves, if they were in vessels deprived of life. Life then
is equally necessary to one and the other. But these subjects are too
obscure to occupy us longer.

V. _Of the properties independent of life._

These are what I call properties of texture. Foreign to inert bodies,
inherent in the organs of living bodies, they arise from their texture,
from the arrangement of their particles, but not from the life that
animates them. Thus death does not destroy them. They remain in the
organs when life is gone; that, however, adds much to their energy.
Putrefaction and the decomposition of the organs, alone destroy them.
The two first of these properties are extensibility and contractility
of texture. I have explained these sufficiently in my Treatise on Life.
I shall have occasion in this work to explain the influence they have
in each system. I shall now speak of a property of which as yet very
little has been said; which chemists have proved by their experiments,
and which physiologists have confounded often with irritability,
but which is as distinct from it as it is from the contractility of
texture; I mean the property of being[3] hardened like horn, and
contracted by the action of different agents. This will be examined
particularly in each system; I shall now describe it in a general
manner only.

 [3] There are no words in English that correspond exactly to the words
 _racornir_, and _racornissement_, and I have therefore been compelled
 to employ the terms, _to harden like horn_, and _horny hardening_, to
 express the precise meaning. _Tr._

Every organized part, submitted either after death or during life, to
the action of fire and of certain concentrated acids, is contracted
and wrinkled in different ways, and is affected almost like irritable
organs when they are excited. Now this property is to be considered as
to the agents which put it in action, as to the organs which are the
seat of it, and as to its phenomena.

1st. Fire is the principal agent of this horny hardening. Every living
organ, placed upon burning coals, is suddenly raised to the highest
degree. 2d. Next to fire, the strongest acids, the sulphuric first,
then the nitric, then the muriatic, make the animal fibres contract
most suddenly. As they are diluted, they lose this power, and the acids
that are naturally very weak have hardly any of it. 3d. Alkohol is
much less powerful in producing this effect, though it may be highly
concentrated. It contracts, however, the texture of parts, which
it condenses and even twists. So that those who preserve anatomical
specimens, find it necessary to dilute the alkohol. 4th. The neutral
salts, after being moistened by the humidity of animal substances,
condense and harden them wonderfully after the lapse of a considerable
length of time. 5th. When the air has taken away, by drying, the
aqueous particles of the solids, these continuing exposed to its
action, contract, wrinkle, and twist in a slow and gradual manner. 6th.
The alkalies, however strong they may be employed, do not produce any
kind of horny hardening. 7th. Water appears to act in a manner opposite
to this horny hardening; it dilates, spreads the organs by maceration,
and separates their particles. It is when it is combined with much
caloric that it produces horny hardening. This phenomenon takes place
at some degrees below boiling, and is very remarkable at that point.

The different agents of which I have just spoken, produce, then, two
species of horny hardening: 1st. the first is prompt, sudden, almost
like the motion which results from the irritation of a living muscle:
2d. the other slow, gradual, and even insensible. Fire and the strong
acids are in a special manner the agents of the first. The action of
the neutral salts, of the air, of alkohol, principally produce the
second.

These two species differ very much in their results. The state to which
the first reduces the organ, is soon changed if the hardening cause
continues. 1st. Fire continuing to act upon the solids, reduces them
to a hard and coaly mass. 2d. Boiling water, after a length of time,
destroys by degrees the hardness the solids had suddenly acquired,
by being plunged into it. As the hardness diminishes, the effect of
the boiling increases, and it arrives at the greatest extent, when
the solid, having lost all consistence, becomes pulpy. 3d. Animal
organs that have been acted upon suddenly by the acids, and become
consequently hard, soon grow soft and change into a true pulp. This
double phenomenon, that is presented on the one hand by boiling, and
on the other by the strong acids, has a great analogy, and seems to be
derived from the same principle.

The slow and insensible horny hardening, the effect of the contact of
neutral salts, such as alum, the muriate of soda, &c. of the air and of
alkohol, offers a very different phenomenon from the first. It is not
altered by the continued action of the cause that produced it, however
long it may be; it does not soften in a slow and insensible manner, as
it has hardened, but remains always firm and contracted.

Are these two species only different degrees of the same, or are they
derived from separate principles? I know not. I have only observed,
that when the living solids have undergone the slow and gradual horny
hardening, they are still susceptible of the other. We know that after
many years drying, animal textures are hardened, as in a recent state,
by the action of fire; I have made the same observation with regard to
boiling and the acids. Textures that have been contracted for a long
time by alkohol and the neutral salts present the same phenomenon.

All animal textures are susceptible of sudden hardening, except the
hair, the epidermis, and the nails; these, if we may so say, exhibit
only the rudiments of it. In general the hardening is more sensible,
in proportion as the fibrous texture predominates in the organs. Hence
the muscles, the tendons, and nerves, are the most susceptible of it.
The organs not fibrous, as the glands, show the least degree of it. The
slow and insensible horny hardening is almost the same in every part.
Both exist in textures deprived of animal contractility, of sensible
organic contractility, and of contractility of texture, as well as in
those which enjoy them in the highest degree. Thus the tendons, the
aponeuroses, the bones, even when their calcareous substance has been
removed by acids, may be hardened as well as the muscles and the skin.
This single circumstance would suffice to distinguish the contractility
arising from hardening from all others, if a variety of differences,
which I shall point out hereafter, under the article of the muscles in
particular, did not.

When a texture is suddenly hardened, it loses more than half its
length, and becomes twisted in various ways. Taken suddenly from the
acid or boiling water, it remains hardened; but if it is pulled, it
becomes elongated, and then contracts again, when the force applied
ceases, so that it has acquired a real elasticity by the process
of hardening. This elasticity is remarkable in the tendons, nerves
and muscles, which before this are absolutely destitute of it. This
elasticity is not an effect of the slow and insensible hardening of
alkohol and the neutral salts. By macerating for a length of time
the organized textures, they gradually lose the power of contracting
suddenly, which does not, however, entirely disappear, until the
maceration has reduced the textures to mere pulp.

If the textures are softened by boiling, and stretched out to their
original length, after having been hardened, this cannot be produced
again by any agent that we may employ.

When the textures are in a state of putrefaction, they no longer
possess this kind of contractility.

Slow and insensible hardening cannot take place during life; this is an
insurmountable obstacle to it. But that which is sudden may, when its
agents have overcome the resistance that vitality offers. Oftentimes we
see the skin hardened by burns. When it is stripped of its epidermis,
and a very strong acid is poured upon it, the same effect is produced
as upon any other organ.

When a part has been hardened upon a living subject, it almost
inevitably dies; it cannot be restored to the suppleness that it
possessed before; suppuration separates it from the sound parts.

The fluids do not present the phenomenon of hardening, the fibrine only
excepted. Separated from the blood, it crisps and contracts.

After what has been said, it is evident that the solids possess the
faculty of contracting or shortening. This is brought into action in
many different ways. During life it appears, 1st. in the influence of
the nerves upon the voluntary muscles; this is animal contractility.
2d. In the involuntary muscles by the action of stimuli; this is
sensible organic contractility. 3d. In the muscles, the skin, the
cellular texture, the arteries, the veins, &c. from a want of
extension. This is the contractility of texture, which is not found,
or at least is very obscure, in many of the organs, as the nerves,
the fibrous bodies, the cartilages, the bones, &c. 4th. By the action
of fire, and the strong acids; this is the contractility of the horny
hardening, and is general.

When the muscles are deprived of life, they lose the two first kinds of
contractility; but the third remains with them as it does with all the
organs that enjoy it. When they are dried or remain in water a little
time, they lose that also; but the fourth still continues with them;
it is the last that abandons the animal textures; it is perpetuated
for a length of years. When I have exposed to the action of fire the
cartilaginous parenchyma of bones found in cemeteries, they have become
hardened. I am persuaded that this faculty would last for many ages, if
we could preserve the organic textures.

Contractility is, then, a common and general property, inherent in all
animal textures, but which, according to the manner that it is brought
into action, presents essential differences, which divide it into many
species, that have no analogy. It would certainly be impossible to
avoid distinguishing the difference between the four species I have
pointed out, and that insensible contraction, or kind of oscillation,
which forms during life the insensible organic contractility, or tonic
motions.

Among the causes that bring contractility into action, some belong,
then, to life, others are independent of it, and are derived only from
organization. All the organs are essentially contractile; but each
of the causes which makes them contract acts only upon this or that
texture: the horny hardening alone has a general effect.

VI. _Observations upon the organization of animals._

The properties, whose influence we have just analyzed, are not
absolutely inherent in the particles of matter that are the seat of
them. They disappear when these scattered particles have lost their
organic arrangement. It is to this arrangement that they exclusively
belong; let us treat of it here in a general way.

All animals are an assemblage of different organs, which, executing
each a function, concur in their own manner, to the preservation of
the whole. It is several separate machines in a general one, that
constitutes the individual. Now these separate machines are themselves
formed by many textures of a very different nature, and which really
compose the elements of these organs. Chemistry has its simple bodies,
which form, by the combinations of which they are susceptible, the
compound bodies; such are caloric, light, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon,
azote, phosphorus, &c. In the same way anatomy has its simple textures,
which, by their combinations four with four, six with six, eight with
eight, &c. make the organs. These textures are, 1st. the cellular;
2d. the nervous of animal life; 3d. the nervous of organic life; 4th.
the arterial; 5th. the venous; 6th. the texture of the exhalants;
7th. that of the absorbents and their glands; 8th. the osseous; 9th.
the medullary; 10th. the cartilaginous; 11th. the fibrous; 12th.
the fibro-cartilaginous; 13th. the muscular of animal life; 14th.
the muscular of organic life; 15th. the mucous; 16th. the serous;
17th. the synovial; 18th. the glandular; 19th. the dermoid; 20th. the
epidermoid; 21st. the pilous.

These are the true organized elements of our bodies. Their nature is
constantly the same, wherever they are met with. As in chemistry, the
simple bodies do not alter, notwithstanding the different compound ones
they form. The organized elements of man form the particular object of
this work.

The idea of thus considering abstractedly the different simple textures
of our bodies, is not the work of the imagination; it rests upon the
most substantial foundation, and I think it will have a powerful
influence upon physiology as well as practical medicine. Under whatever
point of view we examine them, it will be found that they do not
resemble each other; it is nature and not science that has drawn the
line of distinction between them.

1st. Their forms are every where different; here they are flat, there
round. We see the simple textures arranged as membranes, canals,
fibrous fasciæ, &c. No one has the same external character with
another, considered as to their attributes of thickness or size.
These differences of form, however, can only be accidental, and the
same texture is sometimes seen under many different appearances; for
example, the nervous appears as a membrane in the retina, and as
cords in the nerves. This has nothing to do with their nature; it is
then from the organization and the properties, that the principal
differences should be drawn.

2dly. There is no analogy in the organization of the simple textures.
We shall see that this organization results from parts that are common
to all, and from those that are peculiar to each; but the common parts
are all differently arranged in each texture. Some unite in abundance
the cellular texture, the blood vessels and the nerves; in others, one
or two of these three common parts are scarcely evident or entirely
wanting. Here there are only the exhalants and absorbents of nutrition;
there the vessels are more numerous for other purposes. A capillary
net-work, wonderfully multiplied, exists in certain textures, in
others this net-work can hardly be demonstrated. As to the peculiar
part, which essentially distinguishes the texture, the differences
are striking. Colour, thickness, hardness, density, resistance, &c.
nothing is similar. Mere inspection is sufficient to show a number of
characteristic attributes of each, clearly different from the others.
Here is a fibrous arrangement, there a granulated one; here it is
lamellated, there circular. Notwithstanding these differences, authors
are not agreed as to the limits of the different textures. I have had
recourse, in order to leave no doubt upon this point, to the action of
different re-agents. I have examined every texture, submitted them to
the action of caloric, air, water, the acids, the alkalies, the neutral
salts, &c. drying, putrefaction, maceration, boiling, &c. the products
of many of these actions have altered in a different manner each kind
of texture. Now it will be seen that the results have been almost all
different, that in these various changes, each acts in a particular
way, each gives results of its own, no one resembling another. There
has been considerable inquiry to ascertain whether the arterial coats
are fleshy, whether the veins are of an analogous nature, &c. By
comparing the results of my experiments upon the different textures,
the question is easily resolved. It would seem at first view that all
these experiments upon the intimate texture of systems, answer but
little purpose; I think however that they have effected an useful
object, in fixing with precision the limits of each organized texture;
for the nature of these textures being unknown, their difference can be
ascertained only by the different results they furnish.

3dly. In giving to each system a different organic arrangement, nature
has also endowed them with different properties. You will see in the
subsequent part of this work, that what we call _texture_ presents
degrees infinitely varying, from the muscles, the skin, the cellular
membrane, &c. which enjoy it in the highest degree, to the cartilages,
the tendons, the bones, &c. which are almost destitute of it. Shall I
speak of the vital properties? See the animal sensibility predominant
in the nerves, contractility of the same kind particularly marked in
the voluntary muscles, sensible organic contractility, forming the
peculiar property of the involuntary, insensible contractility and
sensibility of the same nature, which is not separated from it more
than from the preceding, characterizing especially the glands, the
skin, the serous surfaces, &c. &c. See each of these simple textures
combining, in different degrees, more or less of these properties, and
consequently living with more or less energy.

There is but little difference arising from the number of vital
properties they have in common; when these properties exist in many,
they take in each a peculiar and distinctive character. This character
is chronic, if I may so express myself, in the bones, the cartilages,
the tendons, &c.; it is acute in the muscles, the skin, the glands, &c.

Independently of this general difference, each texture has a particular
kind of force, of sensibility, &c. Upon this principle rests the whole
theory of secretion, of exhalation, of absorption, and of nutrition.
The blood is a common reservoir, from which each texture chooses, that
which is adapted to its sensibility, to appropriate and keep it, or
afterwards reject it.

Much has been said since the time of Bordeu, of the peculiar life of
each organ, which is nothing else than that particular character which
distinguishes the combination of the vital properties of one organ,
from those of another. Before these properties had been analyzed with
exactness and precision, it was clearly impossible to form a correct
idea of this peculiar life. From the account I have just given of it,
it is evident that the greatest part of the organs being composed of
very different simple textures, the idea of a peculiar life can only
apply to these simple textures, and not to the organs themselves.

Some examples will render this point of doctrine which is important,
more evident. The stomach is composed of the serous, organic muscular,
mucous, and of almost all the common textures, as the arterial, the
venous, &c. which we can consider separately. Now if you should attempt
to describe in a general manner, the peculiar life of the stomach it is
evidently impossible that you could give a very precise and exact idea
of it. In fact the mucous surface is so different from the serous, and
both so different from the muscular, that by associating them together,
the whole would be confused. The same is true of the intestines, the
bladder, the womb, &c.; if you do not distinguish what belongs to each
of the textures that form the compound organs, the term peculiar life
will offer nothing but vagueness and uncertainty. This is so true, that
oftentimes the same textures alternately belong or are foreign to their
organs. The same portion of the peritoneum, for example, enters or does
not enter, into the structure of the gastric viscera, according to
their fulness or vacuity.

Shall I speak of the pectoral organs? What has the life of the
fleshy texture of the heart in common with that of the membrane that
surrounds it? Is not the pleura independent of the pulmonary texture?
Has this texture nothing in common with the membrane that surrounds
the bronchia? Is it not the same with the brain in relation to its
membranes, of the different parts of the eye, the ear, &c.?

When we study a function, it is necessary carefully to consider in a
general manner, the compound organ that performs it; but when you
wish to know the properties and life of this organ, it is absolutely
necessary to decompose it. In the same way, if you would have only
general notions of anatomy, you can study each organ as a whole; but it
is essential to separate the textures, if you have a desire to analyze
with accuracy its intimate structure.

VII. _Consequences of the preceding principles relative to diseases._

What I have been saying leads to important consequences, as it respects
those acute or chronic diseases that are local; for those, which like
most fevers, affect almost simultaneously every part, cannot be much
elucidated by the anatomy of systems. The first then will engage our
attention.

Since diseases are only alterations of the vital properties, and each
texture differs from the others in its properties, it is evident
there must be a difference also in the diseases. In every organ then,
composed of different textures, one may be diseased, while the others
remain sound; now this happens in a great many cases; let us take the
principal organs, for example.

1st. Nothing is more rare than affections of the mass of the brain;
nothing is more common than inflammation of the tunica arachnoides that
covers it. 2d. Oftentimes one membrane of the eye only is affected,
the others preserving their ordinary degree of vitality. 3d. In
convulsions or paralysis of the muscles of the larynx, the mucous
surface is unaffected; and on the other hand the muscles perform their
functions as usual in catarrhs of this surface. Both these affections
are foreign to the cartilages, and vice versa. 4th. We observe a
variety of different alterations in the texture of the pericardium,
but hardly ever in that of the heart itself; it remains sound while
the other is inflamed. The ossification of the common membrane of the
red blood does not extend to the neighbouring textures. 5th. When the
membrane of the bronchia is the seat of catarrh, the pleura is hardly
affected at all, and reciprocally in pleurisy the first is scarcely
ever altered. In peripneumony, when an enormous infiltration in the
dead body shows the excessive inflammation that has existed during
life in the pulmonary texture, the serous and mucous surfaces often
appear not to have been affected. Those who open dead bodies know that
they are frequently healthy in incipient phthisis. 6th. We speak of a
bad stomach, a weak stomach; this most commonly should be understood
as applying to the mucous surface only. Whilst this secretes with
difficulty the nutritive juices, without which digestion is impaired,
the serous surface exhales as usual its fluid, the muscular coat
continues to contract, &c. In ascites, in which the serous surface
exhales more lymph than in a natural state, the mucous oftentimes
performs its functions perfectly well, &c. 7th. All authors have said
much of the inflammation of the stomach, the intestines, the bladder,
&c. For myself I believe that this disease rarely ever affects at first
the whole of any of these organs, except in the case where poison
or some other deleterious substance acts upon them. There are for
the mucous surface of the stomach and intestines, acute and chronic
catarrhs, for the peritoneum serous inflammations, perhaps even for
the layer of organic muscles that separates the two membranes, there
is a particular kind of inflammation, though we have as yet hardly any
thing certain upon this point; but the stomach, the intestines, and the
bladder are not suddenly affected with these three diseases. A diseased
texture can affect those near it, but the primitive affection seizes
only upon one. I have examined a great number of bodies in which the
peritoneum was inflamed either upon the intestines, the stomach, the
pelvis, or universally; now very often when this affection is chronic,
and almost always when it is acute, the subjacent organs remain sound.
I have never seen this membrane exclusively diseased upon one organ,
while that of the neighbouring ones remain untouched; its affection is
propagated more or less remotely. I know not why authors have hardly
ever spoken of its inflammation, and have placed to the account of
the subjacent viscera that which most often belongs only to this.
There are almost as many cases of peritonitis as of pleurisy, and
yet while these last have been particularly noticed the others are
almost entirely overlooked. Oftentimes that part of the peritoneum
corresponding to an organ, is much inflamed; we see it in the case of
the stomach; we observe especially after the suppression of the lochia
or the menses, that it is the portion that lines the pelvis that is
first affected. But soon the affection becomes more or less general; at
least examinations after death prove it satisfactorily. 8th. Certainly
the acute or chronic catarrh of the bladder, or womb even, has nothing
in common with the inflammation of that portion of the peritoneum
corresponding with these organs. 9th. Every one knows that diseases of
the periosteum have oftentimes no connexion with the bone, and vice
versa, that frequently the marrow is for a long time affected, while
both the others remain sound. There is no doubt that the osseous,
medullary and fibrous textures have their peculiar affections which we
shall not confound with the idea we may form of the diseases of the
bones. The same can be said of the intestines, of the stomach, &c. in
relation to their mucous, serous, muscular textures, &c. 10th. Though
the muscular and tendinous textures are combined in a muscle, their
diseases are very different. 11th. You must not think that the synovial
is subject to the same diseases as the ligaments that surround it, &c.

I think the more we observe diseases, and the more we examine bodies,
the more we shall be convinced of the necessity of considering local
diseases, not under the relation of the compound organs, which are
rarely ever affected as a whole, but under that of their different
textures, which are almost always attacked separately.

When the phenomena of diseases are sympathetic, they follow the same
laws as when they arise from a direct affection. Much has been said of
the sympathies of the stomach, the intestines, the bladder, the lungs,
&c. But it is impossible to form an idea of them, if they are referred
to the organ as a whole, separate from its different textures. 1st.
When in the stomach, the fleshy fibres contract by the influence of
another organ and produce vomiting, they alone receive the influence,
which is not extended either to the serous or mucous surfaces; if it
were, they would be the seat, the one of exhalation, the other of
sympathetic exhalation and secretion. 2d. It is certain that when the
action of the liver is sympathetically increased, so that it pours out
more bile, the portion of peritoneum that covers it does not throw
out more serum, because it is not affected by it. It is the same of
the kidney, the pancreas, &c. 3d. For the same reason, the gastric
organs upon which the peritoneum is spread, do not partake of the
sympathetic influences that it experiences. I shall say as much of the
lungs in relation to the pleura, the brain in relation to the tunica
arachnoides, the heart to the pericardium, &c. 4th. It is undeniable
that in all sympathetic convulsions, the fleshy texture is alone
affected, and that the tendinous is not so at all. 5th. What has the
fibrous membrane of the testicles in common with the sympathies of its
peculiar texture? 6th. No doubt a number of sympathetic pains that we
refer to the bones, are seated exclusively in the marrow.

I could cite many other examples to prove, that it is not this or that
organ which sympathizes as a whole, but only this or that texture in
the organs; besides, this is an immediate consequence of the nature of
sympathies. In fact the sympathies are but aberrations of the vital
properties; now these properties vary according to each texture; the
sympathies of these textures then would do the same.

Observe what takes place in fever, accompanying the different kinds
of inflammation. That attending the mucous is slight, that with the
serous severe, and that with the cutaneous has the peculiar character
of showing itself some days before the eruption, as has been noticed
by Pinel. If we attentively observe the fever which attends the
inflammations of all the systems, we shall find as many differences, as
many peculiar characters, as there are systems. Whence does this arise?
From the difference of the relations that unite the heart to each kind
of texture; now this difference of relations is the result of the
difference of the vital forces peculiar to each.

Observe the itch, herpes, cancer, venereal disease, &c. when they have
ceased to be local affections, they spread themselves universally;
they alternately attack different textures, according to the relation
which they have with the organic sensibility of these textures. But it
is almost always separately that they attack them; an organ is never
as a whole influenced by them in all its parts. What do I say? If two
of these diseases exist at the same time, one seizes upon one texture,
the other upon a different one of the same organ. Thus the stomach, the
intestines, the lungs, &c. can be attacked by two different diatheses,
and each will be independent of the other, because each will be fixed
upon a different texture, one upon the mucous, for example, the other
upon the serous, &c.

Let us not, however, exaggerate this independence of the textures of
the organs in diseases, lest experience should contradict us. We shall
see that the cellular system is oftentimes a medium of communication,
not only from one texture to another in the same organ, but from one
organ to a neighbouring one. Thus in many chronic diseases, all the
parts of the same organ are gradually changed, and at the examination
of this organ after death, the whole of it appears to have been
affected, though one of its textures only was so at first. In the
cancer of the breast, you find at first only a small gland that rolls
under the finger; finally the glandular, the cellular, and even the
cutaneous textures are confounded in one common cancerous mass. Cancer
of the stomach, the intestines, the penis, &c. follows the same course.
Observe phthisis, exhibiting in the beginning some small tubercles in
the pulmonary texture, at length invading oftentimes the pleura, the
bronchial membrane, &c. How little soever you may examine bodies with
a view to the same chronic disease, and at different periods, you will
be convinced of the truth of this assertion, viz. that a texture being
at first affected in an organ, communicates its affection gradually to
others, and that you will be deceived in judging of the primitive seat
of the disease, if you attempt to determine it from the parts found
affected at the time of the examination.

In acute diseases, continuity is oftentimes sufficient to explain the
different symptoms that appear in textures that are not affected. The
peritoneal coat only being inflamed, vomiting is produced. We cough and
sometimes expectorate considerably when the pleura alone is diseased.
Delirium comes on when the tunica arachnoides is inflamed, though
the intellectual functions are not connected with it. Frequently the
diseases of the pericardium are sufficient to disturb the motion of the
heart, &c. We cannot deny after this, that oftentimes an alteration
in one of the textures alone of an organ is sufficient to disturb the
functions of all the others; but still it is in one only, that the
primitive source of the evil exists.

I now pass to some other considerations relative to the influence of
the anatomy of systems in diseases.

Since every organized texture has every where the same arrangement;
since, whatever be its situation, it has the same structure and the
same properties, it is evident that its diseases must be every where
the same. It makes no difference, that the serous texture is connected
with the brain by the tunica arachnoides, with the lungs by the pleura,
with the heart by the pericardium, with the gastric viscera by the
peritoneum, &c. every where it is inflamed in the same manner; every
where dropsies take place in the same way; every where it is subject to
a species of eruption of little whitish tubercles, like the miliary, of
which I believe there has been no description, but which deserves great
attention; I have already many times observed this peculiar eruption
of the serous texture, which is generally of a chronic character,
like most of the cutaneous eruptions; I shall speak of it hereafter.
Whatever may be the organ that the mucous texture invests, its
affections have in general the same character, excepting the difference
only that arises from variety of structure. I will say the same of the
fibrous, cartilaginous textures, &c. Mr. Pinel appears to me to have
done much for the art, in being the first who arranged inflammations in
the order of the systems, and embracing in one general view all those
of the same system, whatever may be the organs in which it is found.

There are always two orders of symptoms in inflammations; 1st. those
that belong to the nature of the diseased textures; 2d. those which
depend upon the affected organ, in which the inflammation exists. For
example, the kind of pain, the nature of the accompanying fever, the
duration, the termination, &c. are almost always the same, whatever
serous surface is affected. But difficulty of breathing, dry cough, &c.
prove it to be the pleura; diarrhœa, constipation, vomiting, &c. that
it is the peritoneum; injury of the intellectual functions, that it is
the tunica arachnoides; irregular pulse, that it is the pericardium,
&c. The first belong to the whole class, the second set of symptoms is
confined exclusively to this or that particular sort; now the second
are, if we may so say, accessory, depending upon the proximity of the
affected texture with some other texture. The first are particularly
important.

Medicine has yet much to do, in its researches upon the inflammation
of the different textures. We are well acquainted with that of the
cellular, the cutaneous, the serous, and the mucous; but that of
the others is very obscure. It is yet to be ascertained, which is
attacked, the fibrous or muscular, in rheumatism. I am inclined to
think that it is the first. Almost every thing remains to be known in
the cartilaginous, the synovial, the arterial, the venous, &c. as it
respects their inflammatory phenomena.

In making these researches, it will be necessary to establish one
important distinction; that is, 1st. that certain textures, as the
osseous, the muscular of animal life, &c. are precisely the same in
all the organs in which they are found, and consequently that their
diseases must be the same; 2d. that others, as the cutaneous, the
serous, the mucous, &c. experience, according to the organs to which
they belong, some variety of structure and vital properties, which
necessarily modify the general phenomena of the class of diseases
that belong to these textures; 3d. that others, as the glandular, the
muscular of organic life, &c. are very different in each organ; and
that their general symptoms and class of diseases must consequently
differ considerably.

After having shown most of the local diseases, as affecting almost
always, not an individual organ, but some texture in an organ, it
is necessary to show the differences they present according to the
textures they affect. As under each system, this subject will be
treated more or less fully, I shall only refer to it here.

We shall see, then, that pain is modified differently in each texture,
according to the degree of sensibility that it possesses. No one
excites the same sensations as the others when it is inflamed. Compare
the burning of erisypelas with the throbbing of phlegmon, the pain
of rheumatism with that of inflamed lymphatic glands, &c. We shall
see also that the sense of heat, developed in each inflamed texture,
has a particular character; here it is sharp and biting, there like
the feeling produced by fire, &c. There are two general causes that
produce a variation in the symptoms of diseases: 1st. the nature of
the affected texture; thus, as I have just said, the inflammation of
each produces a different kind of suffering. 2d. The nature of the
disease; we know that cancer, whatever texture it may affect, has a
pain that is peculiar to it; that syphilis and scurvy have also a
peculiar character, that is, however, modified in a slight degree in
each texture.

The difference of textures not only modifies the symptoms, but affects
the duration of them also. Nothing in medicine is more vague, in
this point of view, than the terms acute and chronic, in relation to
inflammations of the different textures. Most commonly they run their
course rapidly in the dermoid, cellular, serous, mucous textures,
&c.; on the other hand, they are slow in the bones, the cartilages,
and the fibro-cartilages. If we apply this distinction to the same
texture, it is very well; thus there are catarrhs, serous and cutaneous
inflammations, &c. that are acute and chronic. But if we generalize it,
it cannot be understood. A catarrh would be chronic if it lasted two
months; but this is the common term of an acute inflammation of the
bones; a chronic one continues for a whole year or more. Cutaneous,
mucous wounds, &c. last only five or six days if they heal by the first
intention; while it requires thirty or forty for a bone, a cartilage,
&c. to be cicatrized by the juxta-position of its different parts.
A disease cannot be classed, then, by its duration, as an acute or
chronic one, except in relation to the same system; when we describe it
then in a general way, this distinction becomes void.

Physicians consider abstractedly almost all diseases. When they
speak of inflammation they describe the redness, swelling, throbbing
and pain, as general attributes, always uniform. If of suppuration,
they take for a general standard that of the cellular texture, in
phlegmon, without thinking that it is only one of the modifications
of suppuration and its product. The same may be said of gangrene,
scirrhus, &c. Nothing is more vague and uncertain than the general
ideas that are given concerning a disease; they scarcely agree in one
or two of the textures.

It is not only the history of diseases that the anatomy of systems
will elucidate; it will change in part the method of treating morbid
anatomy. Morgagni, to whom we owe so much in this respect, and
many others, to whom the art is indebted, have adopted the general
arrangement used in descriptions. They have examined the diseases of
the head, the chest, the abdomen, and the extremities. In following
this method, they can only form to themselves a general idea of the
alterations common to all the textures. The ideas are necessarily too
much contracted, when there is presented only an insulated part of a
system, which is composed of a great many others. If, besides this, you
obtain a general knowledge of the affections of each system, you must
bear in mind, with regard to each, the general ideas concerning the
affections of the parts they compose.

It appears to me to be infinitely more simple to consider at first all
the affections common to each system, and then to observe what every
organ has peculiar to itself in the part that it occupies.

I divide, then, morbid anatomy into two great parts. The first contains
the history of the alterations common to each system, whatever may be
the organ in the structure of which it is concerned, or whatever may be
the place it occupies. It is necessary to show at first the different
alterations of the cellular, arterial, venous, nervous, osseous,
muscular, mucous, serous, synovial, glandular, cutaneous textures,
&c. to examine the kind of inflammation, suppuration, gangrene, &c.
peculiar to each; to speak of the different enlargements of which they
are susceptible, the changes in their nature, which they undergo,
&c. Some, as the mucous, the cutaneous, the serous, the glandular,
&c. afford in this respect an immense field to morbid anatomy. The
others, as the fibrous, the nervous, the muscular, &c. are more rarely
changed in their texture. We shall see hereafter that nutrition alone
is performed in these, and that the others are particularly the seat
of exhalation, absorption, secretion, &c. functions which suppose much
energy in the insensible contractility and organic sensibility, which
are connected with all the alterations of texture.

After having thus pointed out the alterations peculiar to each system,
in whatever organ it is found, an examination should be made of the
diseases peculiar to each region; as those of the head, the chest, the
abdomen, and the extremities, after the common method. Here they may be
divided, 1st. into diseases which can especially affect an organ as a
whole, and not one of its textures alone, which is very rare. 2d. Into
the characters peculiar to each portion of this or that texture; for
example in the head, the peculiar symptoms which are seen in diseases
of the serous surface of the tunica arachnoides, those in affections of
the mucous surface of the pituitary membrane, &c.

This course is incontestably the most natural, though, as in all
divisions in which we wish to copy nature, there are many cases which
it almost excludes.

It seems to me that we live at a period, when morbid anatomy should
take a higher stand. This science is not only that of organic
derangements, that take place slowly, as the principles or consequences
of chronic diseases, it consists in the examination of all the
alterations our organs can undergo, at any period in which we may
observe their diseases. With the exception of certain kinds of fevers
and nervous affections, every thing in pathology is within the
province of this science. How weak appears the reasoning of many great
physicians, when we examine it, not in their works, but on the dead
body. Medicine was for a long time excluded from the circle of the
exact sciences; it will have a right to be associated with them, at
least in the diagnostics of diseases, when we shall every where unite
to accurate observation, an examination of the changes our organs
undergo. This course is beginning to be that of all rational minds;
it will without doubt soon be general. What is observation worth, if
we are ignorant of the seat of the disease? You may take notes, for
twenty years, from morning to night at the bedside of the sick, upon
the diseases of the heart, the lungs, the gastric viscera, &c. and all
will be to you only a confusion of symptoms, which, not being united
in one point, will necessarily present only a train of incoherent
phenomena. Open a few bodies, this obscurity will soon disappear, which
observation alone would never have been able to have dissipated.

VIII. _Remarks upon the classification of functions._

The plan that I have followed in this work, is not the most favourable
to the study of the functions. Many of them, such as digestion,
respiration, &c. would find no place here, because they do not belong
especially to the simple systems, but to a combination of them, an
union of many systems, and even of many organs. Thus what I have said
upon the functions, is introduced only incidentally in this work, the
particular object of which is the analysis of the different simple
systems that form the compound organs. However, as some would wish to
connect the different facts of physiology that it contains, with a
physiological classification, I will now explain that which I have
adopted in my course of lectures.

We know how different the kinds of classification are. The ancient
division, into animal, vital, and natural functions, rests upon so weak
a foundation, that a methodical superstructure could not be raised
upon it. Vicq d'Azyr has substituted one for it which offers hardly
any more advantages, as it separates phenomena that are connected, and
changes into functions, properties, such as sensibility, irritability,
&c. Since this author, others have made divisions which are not more
methodical, and are equally removed from the natural arrangement of the
phenomena of life.

I have endeavoured, as far as possible, in classing the functions, to
follow the path marked out by nature herself. I have laid, in my work
upon Life and Death, the foundations of this classification, which I
pursued before I published this work. Aristotle, Buffon, &c. have seen
in man two kinds of functions, one which connects him with external
bodies, the other, which serves for his nourishment. Grimaud brought
forward again this idea, which is as great as it is true, in his course
of physiology and in his memoir upon nutrition; but by considering
it in too general a manner, he did not analyze it with sufficient
exactness, he ranked among the external functions, only sensation and
motion, he did not describe the brain as the centre of these functions,
nor place the voice among them, which is however one of the great
means of communication, with the bodies that surround us. He did not
analyze more accurately the internal functions. He did not point out
their connexion in the elaboration of nutritive matter, where each
works in its turn, if I may so express myself; nor show the distinctive
characters, which separate generation from all the other functions
relating to the individual alone. Besides, the distinction of internal
and external functions was only presented as a general sketch in his
Memoir upon Nutrition, and not as a means of classification. He did not
avail himself of it, in the division of the functions, in his lectures,
of which many manuscripts arranged by himself, are to be met with at
the present time; in these he examined, 1st. osteogony, which was
treated at much length; 2d. the action of the muscles; 3d. the action
of the vessels or the circulation; 4th. generation; 5th. the action of
the organs of the senses; 6th. the action of the brain and nerves; 7th.
digestion; 8th. secretion; 9th. respiration, &c. From this it may be
perceived, that Grimaud, like preceding authors, mixed together all the
functions without referring them to certain general heads.

In reflecting upon the division pointed out above, I soon saw that it
was not only one of those general views, one of those great outlines,
that are oftentimes made by men of genius who cultivate physiology,
but that it might become the permanent basis of a methodical
classification. To come at this classification I observed that it was
necessary at first to refer all the functions to two great classes,
one relating to the individual, the other to the species; that these
two classes had nothing in common, but the general connexion that
unites all the phenomena of living bodies; but a variety of distinctive
attributes characterize them, which cannot be separated from them.

These two first classes being rigorously defined, and their limits
established by nature, I sought to discover in each, orders equally
natural; this was easy in the functions relating to the individual.
In fact, this was the place for the general outline of Aristotle and
Buffon; but it was not to be presented in too general a manner; the
nature and connexion of the functions peculiar to each order, were to
be accurately assigned.

I called the order of functions that connects us with external bodies,
animal life, thus indicating that this order belongs alone to animals,
that it is more with them than with vegetables, and that it is the
addition of these functions that particularly distinguishes them
from vegetables. I called organic life, the order that serves for the
constant composition and decomposition of our bodies, because this life
is common to all organized beings, vegetables as well as animals; and
because the only condition of enjoying it is organization; so that it
forms a boundary between organic and inorganic bodies, as animal life
serves to separate the two classes that form the first.

Animal life is composed of the action of the senses which receive
impressions, of the brain which perceives them, reflects, and wills,
of the voluntary muscles and larynx that execute this volition, and of
the nerves which are the agents of transmission. The brain is truly
the central organ of this life. Digestion, circulation, respiration,
exhalation, absorption, secretion, nutrition, calorification, compose
organic life, which has the heart for its principal and central organ.

I place calorification here, because it is evident from what I have
said under the article upon the capillary systems, that it is a
function analogous to secretion, exhalation and nutrition. It is truly
a separation of combined caloric, from the mass of blood. It is, if
the expression is preferred, a secretion or exhalation of that fluid
in every part of the body. I have not even at present given this place
to heat in my physiological classification: but in reflecting upon the
method of its production, it will be seen that it ought to have it.

The two orders of the first class being established, it was easy to
assign those of the second, which are three in number: 1st. functions
belonging to the male; 2d. those belonging to the female; 3d. those
arising from an union of the two sexes and the product of this union;
these are the three orders.

Such is the classification that I made in my Lectures on Physiology;
it has evidently nothing in common with any of those that are found
in physiological works; and if you reflect upon it a little, it
will appear I think infinitely preferable to any of them. Observe in
fine, that each class and each order have general and characteristic
attributes that particularly distinguish them, and which being
applicable to all the functions of that order, mark a difference
between them and all the functions of any other order. I have pointed
out moreover the distinctive attributes of animal and of organic life;
I have shown that the organs of one are symmetrical, those of the other
irregular; that there is a harmony in the functions of the first, a
discordance in those of the second; that one commences sooner and
terminates later, &c.

I have demonstrated, that the cerebral nerves belong especially to
animal life, the nerves of the ganglions to the organic, which appears
to me to be a remarkable difference, and which has induced me to make
two systems of the nerves, that anatomists have united in one. The
first, belonging to animal life, is composed of the cerebral nerves,
the other to organic, is formed of the nerves of the ganglions, or what
is commonly called the great sympathetic.

But it is the vital powers especially that distinguish one life from
another. I have shown that one kind of sensibility and contractility
belongs to animal life, and another to organic. Now as these vital
properties are the principle of the functions, it is evident that the
division of these properties demonstrates that that of the two lives is
not an abstraction, but that it is nature herself that has fixed the
limits, since she has made particular properties for each.

It is impossible to form a precise idea of the vital properties,
without admitting the division I have made. How many disputes there
have been, upon the subject of sensibility! Not one of them would
have taken place, if the attributes of animal life had been properly
distinguished from those of the organic. Certainly no one will
hereafter confound in one view, as frequently has been done, the
faculty that the heart has of being sensible to the entrance of the
blood, without transmitting that impression, and the faculty that the
skin, the other senses, the nerves, &c. have, not only of feeling the
impression of external bodies, but of transmitting it to the brain, so
that the sensation may be perceived.

If you include under one common name of irritability, the motions of
muscles that contract only by stimuli, and those which the cerebral
influence puts in action, it is impossible that you should be
understood.

There has been much discussion during the last age, upon the point,
whether sensibility is the same as contractility, or if these two
properties can be separated. Each of the two opinions seem to have
rested upon an equally solid foundation. But all these disputes
will be done away, by admitting the distinction I have made in the
vital properties. 1st. In animal life, then, it is evident, that
contractility is not a necessary consequence of sensibility; thus
frequently external objects make for a long time an impression upon
us, and yet the voluntary muscles remain unmoved. 2d. On the other
hand, in organic life, these two properties are never separated. In
the involuntary motions of the heart, the stomach, the intestines,
&c. there is first an excitement of the organic sensibility, and
then an action of the sensible organic contractility. In the same
manner, in the motions necessary to secretion, exhalation, &c. when
the organic sensibility has been brought into action, immediately
insensible organic contractility takes place. It is that they may
be studied better, and appreciated more accurately, that in organic
life, I separate these two kinds of contractility from sensibility.
In the natural state they are inseparable. Hence why the passive
sympathies of animal sensibility are very different from those of
animal contractility, and make two distinct classes, whilst the
passive sympathies of organic sensibility can never be separated from
the corresponding contractilities. We suffer by sympathy, and are
sympathetically convulsed in a distinct manner; these two things are
almost always separate. On the contrary, sensation and motion in the
organic sympathies are inseparable.

I could prove by many examples, that all the disputes, and all the
diversities of opinion, upon the subject of the vital properties,
proceed only from this cause, that those which preside over the
functions of one life, have not been distinguished from those which put
into action the functions of the other.

Let us return to my physiological division; I will now give a table
of it, which, presenting it under one point of view, will give a more
precise idea of the classification. This table comprehends, 1st. the
prolegomena of the science; 2d. the exposition of the functions. In the
prolegomena, every thing is referred to two great considerations; on
the one hand to organic texture, described in a general manner, and on
the other to life, considered in relation to its great attributes.




                         TABLE OF PHYSIOLOGY.


                            _PROLEGOMENA._

               GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON ORGANIC TEXTURE.

                              SECTION I.
              │1st. Of the organic texture of animals.
              │2d. Of simple textures, in general.
              │3d. Of organs, in general.
              │4th. Of the apparatus, in general.[4]

  [4] In a subsequent part of this work, the author defines _appareil_,
  which I have translated by the word _apparatus_, to be an assemblage
  of many systems. It will be perceived that the English word in this
  and some other instances is in the plural number. I should certainly
  have preferred some other term more conformable to the idiom of our
  own language if I had known any one that would so well have conveyed
  the sense of the author. _Tr._

                              SECTION II.
   ┌1st. Of the properties of texture.
   │
   │2d. Division of the      ┌Extensibility.
   │  properties of texture. └Contractility. ┌1st. By want of extension.
   │                                         └2d. By horny hardening.
   └3d. Characters of the properties of texture.


                    GENERAL OBSERVATIONS UPON LIFE.

                              SECTION I.
  ┌1st. Of life and its functions.
  │                        ┌Of those relating  ┌Animal functions.
  │                        │to the individual. └Organic functions.
  │                        │
  │2d. Classification of   │                   ┌Functions of the male.
  │    functions           │Of those relating  │Functions of the female.
  │                        └to the species.    │Functions relating to the
  │                                            │ union of the sexes, and
  │                                            └ the product of this union.
  │
  │3d. Of the differences and relations that exist between the two classes
  │     of functions.
  │4th. Of the differences and relations that exist between the two orders
  │      of the first class.
  │5th. Of the differences and relations that exist between the three orders
  └      of the first class.

                             SECTION II.
  ┌1st. Of the vital properties.
  │                             ┌Animal properties ┌Sensibility.
  │                             │                  │Contractility.
  │2d. Division of the vital    │
  │     properties              │Organic       ┌Sensibility.
  │                             └ properties   │Sensible and insensible
  │                                            └ contractility.
  │3d. Characters of the vital properties.     ┌Habit.
  │                                            │Sex.
  │4th. Of the causes which modify the         │Climate.
  │  vital properties                          │Seasons.
  │                                            └Age, &c.
  │
  │5th. Of the peculiar differences of the vital ┌Of that which is called
  │  properties, in each simple texture, in each └ individual life.
  │  individual
  │                                              ┌Of temperament.
  │6th. Of the general differences of the vital  │Of the passions.
  │  properties in different individuals         └Of the character.
  │
  │7th. Sympathies of vital properties. ┌Animal sympathies ┌Of sensibility.
  │                                     │                  └Of contractility.
  └8th. Division of sympathies          │                   ┌Of sensible
                                        └Organic sympathies │ contractility.
                                                            │Of insensible
                                                            └ contractility.




                           OF THE FUNCTIONS.


          FIRST CLASS.—FUNCTIONS RELATIVE TO THE INDIVIDUAL.


               ORDER FIRST.—_Functions of Animal Life._

                        GENUS I. _Sensations._
  ┌1st. Of the general sensations, or feeling, ┌external.
  │                                            └internal.
  │                             ┌Hearing.
  │                             │Seeing.
  │2d. Of particular sensations │Smelling.
  │                             │Tasting
  │                             └Feeling.
  └3d. Of pleasure and of pain.

                    GENUS II. _Cerebral Functions._

                              ┌Of perception.
  ┌1st. Relative to sensation │Of imagination.
  │                           └Of memory.
  │                                  ┌Of attention.
  │                                  │Of the ideas.
  │2d. Relative to the understanding │Of the judgment.
  │                                  └Of the reasoning faculty, &c.
  │
  │                       ┌Of the will,  ┌the         ┌Of the
  │3d. Relative to motion │which is      │ judgment.  │ opposition
  │                       └determined by │the         │ of these two
  │                                      └ passions.  └ causes.
  │
  └4th. Connexion of the cerebral functions with life ┌Of concussion.
                                                      └Of apoplexy, &c.

                       GENUS III. _Locomotion._
                                    ┌on the feet   Standing.
  ┌                                 │on the knees.
  │1st. Of the immoveable attitudes │on the pelvis.
  │                                 │on the head, &c. &c.
  │                                 └—Prostration.
  │
  │              ┌                   ┌ Prepulsion.
  │              │                   │ Repulsion.
  │              │Of the superior    │ Diduction.
  │              │  extremities.     │ Pressure.
  │              │                   └ Elevation, &c.
  │              │                   ┌Walking.
  └2d. Motion    │Of the inferior    │Running.
                 │  extremities.     └Leaping.
                 │Of the trunk.       Support, raising weights.
                 │Of the whole body.  Swimming.
                 │                      ┌1st. Gestures of the face.
                 │Of gesture considered │2d. Gestures of the head in
                 │  as an auxiliary     │  general.
                 └  to the voice.       │3d. Gestures of the superior
                                        └  extremities.


                          GENUS IV. _Voice._
  ┌1st. Of the voice of brutes   Dumbness.
  │2d. Of speech.                ┌Of stuttering.
  │                              └Of lisping, &c.
  │
  │3d. Of singing                ┌true.
  │                              └false.
  └4th. Of declamation.

                   GENUS V. _Nervous transmission._
  ┌1st. Transmission to the brain of sensations  ┌general.
  │                                              └particular.
  │2d. Transmission of motion         ┌to the locomotive organs.
  │                                   └to the vocal organs.
  └3d. Mode of transmission.


         OF THE INTERMISSION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF ANIMAL LIFE.

                               _Sleep._
                  ┌partial  ┌of the senses.
  ┌ 1st. natural. │         │of the brain  ... Of sympathetic sleep.
  │               │         └of the muscles.
  │               └general.
  │ 2d. unnatural.
  └ 3d. Dreams and somnambulism.


              ORDER SECOND.—_Functions of organic life._

                         GENUS I. _Digestion._
  ┌1st. Of hunger and thirst.
  │2d. Of aliments.
  │3d. Of taking of aliments  ┌solid.
  │                           └fluid.
  │4th. Of mastication, of lubricating with saliva and deglutition.
  │                      ┌in the œsophagus. Action of the liquor of the
  │                      │                   œsophagus.
  │5th. Alteration of    │in the stomach.   Action of the gastric liquor.
  │ the alimentary mass. │in the small ┌Action of the bile.
  │                      └ intestines  │Action of the pancreatic liquor.
  │                                    └Action of the intestinal liquor.
  │
  │6th. Separation of the substances that are nutritive from those
  │   that are not.
  │                                             ┌the lacteals.
  │7th. Absorption of the nutritive substance;  │the mesenteric glands,
  │   course of the chyle in                    │the thoracic duct.
  │                                             └the blood vessels.
  │8th. Excretion of the non-nutritive          ┌Of the peristaltic motion.
  │   substance                                 │Of the fecal matter.
  │                                             └Of the intestinal gas.
  │                                         ┌the pharynx and œsophagus.
  │                                         │the stomach.
  └9th. Of vomiting, as it has its seat in  │the small intestines.
                                            │the large intestines.
                                            └—Sympathetic vomiting.

                       GENUS II. _Respiration._
  ┌1st. Of the air.
  │2d. Mechanical phenomena                  ┌Inspiration.
  │                                          └Expiration.
  │3d. Chemical Phenomena relative           ┌to the air.
  │                                          └to the blood.
  └4th. Connexion of respiration with life.   Of asphyxia, &c.

                       GENUS III. _Circulation._
                  ┌Circulation of red blood.
                  │Circulation of black blood.
  ┌1st. general   │Action of the heart.
  │               │Action of the arteries.
  │               │Action of the veins.
  │               │Connexion of the circulation with life.
  │               └  Of syncope, &c.
  │2d. abdominal.
  │                          ┌phenomena of the motion of the blood.
  │               ┌general   └change of red to black.
  └3d. capillary  │          ┌its relation with the general.
                  └pulmonary └change of black to red blood.

                       GENUS IV. _Exhalations._
                     ┌of their agents.
  ┌1st. in general   │of their phenomena.
  │                  │of their alterations.
  │                  └—Sympathetic exhalations.
  │                    ┌serous.
  │                    │cellular  ┌of fat.
  │                    │          └of serum.
  │2d. in particular.  │synovial  ┌in the grooves of the tendons.
  └  Exhalations       │          └in the articulations.
                       │          ┌in the middle of the long bones.
                       └medullary │in the extremities of the long bones,
                                  └  in the short and flat ones.

                        GENUS V. _Absorptions._
                    ┌Of their agents.
  ┌1st. in general  │Of their phenomena.
  │                 │Of their alterations.
  │                 └—Sympathetic absorptions.
  │                    ┌serous.
  │                    │cellular  ┌ of fat.
  │2d. in particular.  │          └ of serum.
  └   Absorptions      │synovial  ┌ in the grooves of the tendons.
                       │          └ in the articulations.
                       │          ┌ in the middle of the long bones.
                       └medullary │ in the extremities of the long bones,
                                  └ in the short and flat ones.

                        GENUS VI. _Secretions._
                     ┌Of their agents.
  ┌1st. in general   │Of their phenomena.
  │                  │Of their alterations.
  │                  └—Sympathetic secretions.
  │                              ┌lachrymal.
  │                              │salivary and pancreatic.
  │                              │hepatic.
  └2d. in particular. Secretions │renal.
                                 │mucous.
                                 └sebaceous.

                      GENUS VII.  _Nutrition._
  ┌1st. Of the double nutritive motion.
  │                          ┌Nutritive matter,  ┌ the chyle.
  │2d. Composition of organs │  considered in ...│ the blood.
  │                          └—Assimilation.     └ the organs themselves.
  │
  │3d. Decomposition of organs.
  │4th. Causes that modify nutrition.
  │                                ┌infancy     Of increase in height.
  │5th. Of nutrition considered in │youth       Of increase in thickness.
  │                                │adult age.
  │                                └old age     Decrease.
  └ 6th. Of natural death.

                     GENUS VIII. _Calorification._
  ┌1st. Phenomena of animal heat.
  │                                        ┌respiration.
  │ 2d. Entrance of caloric by             │digestion.
  │                                        └absorption.
  │ 3d. Its latent state in the blood.
  │ 4th. Its disengagement in the capillary system.
  │ 5th. Its exit from the body.
  └ 6th. Of the sympathies of heat, and of sympathetic heat.


           SECOND CLASS.—FUNCTIONS RELATIVE TO THE SPECIES.

             A COMPARISON OF THE TWO SEXES. HERMAPHRODISM.

 ORDER FIRST.—_Functions peculiar to the male. Phenomena of puberty in
                                 man._

                  GENUS I. _Production of the semen._
  ┌1st. Secretion in the testicle.
  │2d. Residence in the vesiculæ.
  │3d. Excretion                Of erection and its phenomena.
  │4th. Of the semen.
  └5th. Of eunuchs.


  ORDER SECOND.—_Functions peculiar to the female. Phenomena of puberty
                              in woman._

                       GENUS I. _Menstruation._
  ┌1st. Of its seat.
  │2d. Of its periodical return.
  │3d. Of its alterations.
  └4th. Of its cessation.

                    GENUS II. _Production of milk._
                                ┌Difference of this secretion from others.
  ┌1st. Secretion in the breast └Relation between the breast and womb.
  │
  │                             ┌spontaneous.
  │2d. Excretion                └by suckling.
  └3d. Of the milk.

      GENUS III. _Of the fluids of women proper for generation._
  ┌What these fluids are.
  └What is their influence.


  ORDER THIRD.—_Functions relative to the union of the sexes, and the
                        product of this union._

                        GENUS I. _Generation._
  ┌1st. Sexual intercourse.
  │                        ┌Its phenomena ┌in the womb.
  └2d. Conception          │              └in the tubes and ovaries.
                           └Hypotheses.

                    GENUS II. _Gestation, relative_
  ┌1st. to the mother  ┌General state of her functions.
  │                    └State of the womb.
  │                    ┌Of its animal life; it is almost nothing.
  │                    │Of its organic life  ┌Functions that it wants.
  └ 2d. to the fœtus   │                     └Activity of assimilation.
                       └Of monsters.

           GENUS III. _Parturition and subsequent phenomena_
  ┌1st. Causes and mechanism of parturition.
  │2d. Of the lochia.
  │                                     ┌Development of its animal life.
  └3d. Phenomena of the new born infant └Functions added to its organic.


This is a sketch of the general plan that I have adopted in my
lectures. Those who have attended them, will find here some changes in
one part, and additions in another. But they can easily arrange under
it all the facts that are contained in this work, if they wish to refer
them to a physiological classification, instead of distributing them
according to the anatomical order in which I present them here.

Though a line of demarcation separates each order of functions, it is
not necessary, however, to take, in too exact a sense, the divisions
pointed out above. Each order is connected with the others, more or
less intimately. For example, in the first class, when one order
ceases, another is soon annihilated. It is thus that I have shewn
elsewhere that the heart, which is the principal agent of organic
life, being interrupted, the brain, which is the central organ of
animal life, is immediately stopt for the want of excitement, and the
functions over which it presides are destroyed. It is thus also, as I
have shown, that the brain, having under its immediate superintendence,
respiration, by the means of the diaphragm and intercostals, which
receive the cerebral nerves, has the circulation directly under its
control, and thus the whole of organic life, which ceases when its
action is interrupted. It is on this account that I have considered
respiration as the link that connects animal with organic life, and
have proved that a fœtus without a brain, or without something to
supply its place, cannot live out of the womb of its mother. Every
thing is connected, every thing is united in the animal economy. We
live without and within in a distinct manner, but one life cannot
be preserved as a whole, independent of the other. Thus, though the
functions should be studied abstractedly, we should always have in view
their connexion, when we consider the whole of them as simultaneously
in operation.

It will be seen that in the Descriptive Anatomy, I have adopted a
classification analogous to that of physiology. The one differs,
however, a little from the other, because the same organs often serve
for many functions, and especially because certain functions, such as
exhalation, nutrition, calorification, have not, to speak correctly,
any distinct and determinate organs.




GENERAL ANATOMY.




SYSTEMS

COMMON TO ALL THE APPARATUS.


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

The organized systems of the living economy may be divided into two
great classes. One, generally distributed and every where present,
concurs not only in the formation of all the apparatus, but even
in that of the other systems, and offers to every organized part a
common and uniform base; this includes the cellular, arterial, venous,
exhalant, absorbent, and nervous systems. The other, on the contrary,
placed in certain determinate apparatus, foreign to the rest of
the economy, has a less general and oftentimes an almost insulated
existence; this embraces the osseous, cartilaginous, fibrous, muscular,
mucous, serous systems, &c. &c.

The first part of this work will be devoted to the examination of the
general systems, of the generative systems, if I may so express myself,
systems which are not however of such importance that all the organized
parts are necessarily provided with these six. In fine, in some there
are neither arteries nor veins; in others nerves; in some but little
cellular texture; but they concur to form the greatest number, and some
are always found where others are wanting. Thus in the tendons, in
the cartilages, &c. which are deprived of blood, there are exhalants,
absorbents, &c.

In general, it appears that the exhalant and absorbent systems are
the most universally diffused. Nutrition supposes this; in fact this
function is the result of a double movement; one of composition, which
brings to the organs, the other of decomposition, that carries from
them the nutritive matter; now the exhalants are the agents of the
first movement, and the absorbents of the second. As every organ is
nourished, and as the mechanism of nutrition is uniform, it follows
that these two systems belong to all the organs. After them the
cellular system is the most generally found. Where there are no blood
vessels, it is sometimes met with, and it always exists where these
vessels are. Next to this, the arteries and veins are spread to the
greatest number of parts. Oftentimes no nerve is discoverable, where
they penetrate, as in the aponeuroses, the fibrous membranes, &c. &c.
The nervous is of all the generative systems, that which is found by
dissection in the smallest number of parts. The serous membranes, the
whole fibrous system, the cartilaginous, the fibro-cartilaginous, the
osseous, &c. appear to be deprived of it.

Particularly destined to form a part of the structure of other organs,
the generative systems perform the same office for one another; thus
the cellular texture enters into the composition of the nerves, and
the arteries and veins; and the arteries and veins are ramified in the
cellular texture, &c. It is a general intermixture of one with the
other.

It may be imagined, from what has now been said, that the generative
systems, considered under the relation of organs, forming a common
and uniform base for all, ought to be sooner developed than others;
and this, observation proves. While there is hardly an outline of
the others in the first months of the fœtus, these predominate in a
remarkable manner. The nerves, and their centre, which is the brain,
the arteries, the veins and their central organ, which is the heart,
the cellular texture, the exhalants and the absorbents, exhibit this
phenomenon in a striking degree. Mere inspection suffices to prove this
in the nervous, arterial, venous and cellular systems; in the other two
it is proved by the wonderful activity of absorption and exhalation, at
this period of life.

From what has just been said of the general systems of the economy,
it is easy to perceive that they perform the most important part of
nutrition. They form the nutritive parenchyma of each organ; now I call
the nutritive parenchyma, the cellular, vascular and nervous outline
of that organ. It is in this outline that the nutritive matter is
deposited. This matter being different for each organ, establishes a
difference between them. For the bones, it is phosphate of lime and
gelatine; it is gelatine alone for the cartilages, tendons, &c.; fibrin
for the muscles, albumen for certain other organs; so that if the
nutritive parenchyma of a bone was filled with fibrin, it would be a
muscle in the form of a bone, and vice versa, a muscle would become a
bone with a muscular form, if its parenchyma was filled up with earthy
and gelatinous substances. We should know the nature of all the living
parts, if their nutritive substances were known to us; but the most
of them are unknown, it is chemistry that must enlighten us upon this
subject. All the organs resemble each other in their parenchyma, or at
least have a great analogy. If it were possible to remove, from all
the nutritive matter and leave this parenchyma untouched, we should
see only among them, varieties of form, of size, of deposition of
cellular layers, of vascular or nervous branches, but not of nature and
composition.

In the first period after conception, the mucous mass that represents
the fœtus, appears to be only a compound of the general systems.
Each organ has as yet only its nutritive parenchyma, the parenchyma
upon which nature has imprinted the form of the organ, that is to
be developed there. In proportion as this outline is increased, the
nutritive substances penetrate it, and then each organ, which until
that time had been like the rest in its nature, and forming with them a
homogeneous mass, begins to be distinct, and have a separate existence;
each one draws from the blood the substance that is proper for it. This
addition gives the attributes of thickness, of density, and of nature;
but the increase of parenchyma, the augmentation of its dimensions are
always antecedent to this. Whilst all inorganic bodies increase by the
addition of particles, there is here at first an expansive force, from
which length and breadth arise, afterwards substances are exhaled into
the parenchyma, which lengthen and widen it.

By what mechanism is it, that each organ draws the materials of its
nutrition from the blood, the common source? This depends entirely upon
the organic sensibility peculiar to each, which places it in relation
to this or that substance and not to another, and which makes it
appropriate it to itself, is penetrated by it, and suffers it to enter
its vessels on all sides while it draws back and contracts, to prevent
what is foreign to it, from being introduced into its texture.

After this substance has continued for some time to form the organ,
it then becomes foreign to it and heterogeneous; by remaining longer
it would be injurious; it is absorbed and thrown out by the different
emunctories; a new substance of the same kind, which is brought by
exhalation, takes its place. Each organ is then constantly in a
state of composition and decomposition; but this composition and
decomposition vary in their proportion. The predominance of the first
over the second, constitutes growth. Their equilibrium establishes the
stationary state of the body, which is the case with the adult. When
the activity of the second is greater than that of the first, then
decrease and decrepitude follow.

Such is, in short, the manner in which the general theory of nutrition
should be considered, a theory which I shall explain at length in my
physiology, and upon which I will now offer a few words, to show that
it is not a system formed by accident, but that it rests upon the laws
of the economy, and upon its organic phenomena. Now I think that this
assertion will be demonstrated, if I prove, 1st. the uniformity of the
parenchyma of nutrition; 2d. the variety of the nutritive substances;
3d. the faculty which the parenchyma of nutrition has of appropriating
to itself, according to the quantity of its organic sensibility, this
or that nutritive substance, to the exclusion of others, of afterwards
throwing out this substance, and of taking new. These are in fact the
fundamental principles of this theory.

I say in the first place, that the parenchyma of nutrition is the same
for all the organs, and that it is an assemblage of red vessels, of
exhalants, of absorbents, of cellular texture, and of nerves; these are
the proofs. 1st. These different organs are met with in all the others,
as I have observed before, anatomy shows them every where, between each
fibre, each layer, each point, if I may so say; they are truly the
common organs. 2d. When we take away from the organs their different
nutritive substances, for example, from the bones the phosphate of
lime by acid, and the gelatine by boiling, there is a residue which
is evidently cellular and vascular. 3d. There is no doubt but that
the mechanism of the union of divided parts is the same as that of
their natural nutrition. Now in the healing of wounds, the parenchyma
of nutrition is first developed, and is every where the same; every
where fleshy points appear, which are cellular and vascular, which
have the same appearance and same character, whether they arise from
a bone or a cartilage, a muscle, the skin, a ligament, &c. All wounds,
in healing, like the organs, resemble each other in their parenchyma;
they differ also like the organs, in the nutritive substance that is
afterwards deposited in its texture, substances which vary according
to the part where the wound happens to be; thus the deposit of the
phosphate of lime gives to the callus a different character from that
of muscular wounds, which are united by the exhalation of fibrin in
the fleshy points that first arise upon the divided surfaces, &c.
4th. The mucous substance which forms the body of the embryo, appears
to be nothing but cellular or mucous texture, as Bordeu calls it,
which is abundantly supplied with vessels and nerves. In fact, when
the organs are developed in this mucous substance, it may be seen in
their interstices for a certain length of time, and exhibits there
the same appearance as the body of the embryo in the first periods;
gradually this substance becomes condensed, is filled with cells,
and assumes the form of cellular texture; whence it may be presumed,
that in this mucous state of the embryo, there is only the nutritive
parenchyma of the organs; and as the parenchyma is the same in all, it
is evident that the mass of the embryo must be homogeneous. Nutrition
commences, and then each organ appropriates to itself the substance
which is proper for it; after this it ceases to be homogeneous. From
these considerations, it becomes easy to admit the uniformity of the
parenchyma of nutrition, and its cellular, vascular and, in certain
cases, nervous texture.

I am aware, that by admitting this common parenchyma of nutrition, it
becomes necessary that it should be nourished itself, and consequently
that we must go farther back; but in physiology, the art of finding the
truth consists, in searching for it in secondary causes; here facts and
experiments enlighten our way, beyond that, imagination only is our
guide.

After having demonstrated that the organs resemble each other in a
common parenchyma of nutrition, it is unnecessary to prove that they
differ by the substances that are deposited there. Animal chemistry has
within a few years past so much elucidated this point, that it is not
worth while to waste time in refuting what has been written upon the
identity of the nutritive juice.

In fine, it is easy to conceive, how each parenchyma of nutrition
appropriates to itself according to the quantity of organic sensibility
it enjoys, the nutritive substances that are proper for it, and which
are brought to it by the circulation. It is not a phenomenon peculiar
to nutrition; it is observable in all the acts of the organic economy.
Thus the secretions take place only in consequence of the determined
quantity of this sensibility, which, placing each gland in relation
with the fluid that it should separate, makes it receive this fluid,
and reject the others; thus the red part of the blood does not
ordinarily pass into the exhalants, because the serous part is alone
in relation with their organic sensibility; thus the substances that
pass the intestines, do not stop in the biliary or pancreatic ducts,
although their diameter is sufficient to admit them; thus cantharides
are exclusively in relation with the sensibility of the kidneys,
mercury with that of the salivary organs, &c. &c.

We see from this, that the mechanism by which the parenchymas of
nutrition appropriate to themselves nutritive substances, is not an
insulated phenomenon, but a consequence of a general law of organic
sensibility. But why has this property as many degrees as there are
organs in the economy? Why do these degrees establish relations so
different between the organs and the substances that are foreign to
them? Let us stop here; let us be contented with proving this fact by
a great number of examples, without trying to discover the cause. We
could offer nothing but conjectures upon this subject.

These few notions upon the nutritive phenomena, though indirectly
connected with the subject of this volume, are not misplaced here;
because in these phenomena, the generative systems upon which we
are going to treat, perform the greatest part, and because we shall
frequently have occasion to refer to them in the examination of the
development of the organs, the development that authors have only
vaguely examined, upon which the most exact and the most judicious of
all physiologists, Haller, has only slightly glanced, but which however
ought to receive the particular attention of physicians, of those
especially who wish to consider diseases under the essential relation
of the influence that age has upon them.




CELLULAR SYSTEM.


This system, which many know still, under the name of the cribriform
body, the mucous texture, &c. is an assemblage of filaments, and of
white soft layers, intermixed and interwoven in different ways, leaving
between them spaces communicating together, more or less irregular, and
which serve as a reservoir for the fat and serum. Placed around the
organs, the different parts of this system act at the same time as a
bond to connect, and as an intermediate body to separate them. Carried
into the interior of these same organs, they essentially contribute to
their structure.

The great extent of this system, which, though every where spread, is
every where continuous, the number of organs it surrounds, and the
multiplied relations it presents, do not allow me to describe it, as
has been done, in one point of view; in order to give a complete view,
it is necessary to separate the different points in which it may be
examined.

I shall then at first consider abstractedly the general system, as
represented by the continuity of all its parts, in order to consider it
in relation to the organs that it surrounds, or to whose composition it
concurs. I shall examine it afterwards independently of these organs,
as it is spread everywhere in the spaces between them. In fine, its
organization, its properties, its relations with other systems, and its
development will be the object of my researches.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONSIDERED IN RELATION TO THE OTHER ORGANS.

The cellular system, considered in an insulated manner, and in relation
to each organ of the animal economy, can be described in two secondary
relations. 1st. It forms for each organ a covering, a boundary which is
exterior to it. 2d. It enters essentially into the structure of each,
and forms one of the essential bases of this structure.


1st. _Of the cellular system upon the exterior of each organ._

The different conformation of the different organs, establishes two
very distinct modifications in the relations of the cellular texture,
that is exterior to them. In one case in fact, it is contiguous only
to one of their surfaces, in the other it envelopes them entirely. The
first arrangement takes place, when these organs have one side free,
and the other attached, as for example, the skin. The second, which is
the most general, is observed, when an organ is attached every where to
those in the vicinity of it. Let us describe separately each of these
two arrangements.


_Of the cellular system which adheres only to one side of the organs._

There are three membranous organs which are free on one side, and
clothed on the other by the cellular texture; these are the skin,
and the serous and mucous membranes. We can also consider here, that
which covers the exterior of the arteries, the veins, the absorbents
and the excretories, which are destitute of it in their interior. As
this texture enters also into the structure of these vessels, most
authors have examined it, in treating of them. It appears to me more
convenient to present under one point of view all the parts of the
cellular system.


_Sub-cutaneous cellular texture._

Besides the chorion, into which, as we shall see, a great quantity of
cellular texture enters, and which anatomists consider as formed by
a particular condensation of this texture, the skin, everywhere that
we examine it, presents a subjacent cellular layer, the quantity and
density of which vary in the different parts of the body.

Upon the greatest part of the median line, this texture appears more
compact, and more adherent to the skin than in many other places. We
may be convinced of this, by dissecting upon the middle of the nose,
of the lips, of the sternum, upon the linea alba of the abdomen, upon
the range of the vertebral and sacral spinous processes, upon the
posterior cervical ligament, &c. From this adhesion arises a sort of
division of the two great halves of the sub-cutaneous cellular texture;
a division that I have sometimes made very evident in my experiments
upon emphysema. The air being driven with moderate force under the
integuments of one side of the body, diffuses itself gradually, and
is stopped in many instances at the median line, so that one side is
puffed up and the other exhibits the ordinary state of the cells. It
is oftentimes necessary to increase the force very much, in order to
overcome the resistance and render the emphysema general. However, we
cannot always produce this phenomenon, and sometimes the air spreads
immediately every where; this takes place especially if it is forced
in about the neck, for the sub-cutaneous texture is as loose there in
front, upon the median line, as it is upon the sides.

It is only from the circumstance, that the sub-cutaneous texture
immediately under the median line, is somewhat more compact than
elsewhere, that we can say with Bordeu, that this texture divides
the body perpendicularly into two equal parts. No where, but under
the skin, do we see any trace of this separation. Besides, I have
demonstrated in one of my works, that the division of the body into two
symmetrical parts, is a general attribute of the organs of animal life,
an attribute which distinguishes them from those of the internal life,
which seem to be characterized by their irregularity; it is under this
relation, and not under that of Bordeu, which is contrary to anatomical
facts, that the median line should be described.

In the other parts of the body, the sub-cutaneous cellular texture
varies considerably. 1st. The density of this texture is remarkable in
the hairy scalp, which is with difficulty separated on that account
from the aponeuroses and subjacent muscles. Those who have often
examined patients who have died of apoplexy, know that sometimes
their heads and necks are emphysematous; I have already seen four.
Now whilst considerable air is found in the face, little or none is
met with under the hairy scalp. 2d. In the face, the sub-cutaneous
texture is remarkably loose, it is very abundant there. 3d. Upon the
trunk this laxity is also very evident; it accommodates itself to the
motions which the great and broad muscles perform there. 4th. Upon the
extremities, the sub-cutaneous cellular texture, situated between the
aponeuroses and the skin, offers almost every where an equal degree
of relaxation. It is only upon the palm of the hand and the sole of
the foot that, its texture becoming more compact, the adhesion of
the aponeuroses to the skin is more evident, an arrangement that is
favourable to the use of these two parts, which are designed to adapt
themselves to the forms of external bodies, to grasp and hold them. It
is to this compact texture, that must be referred the difficulty that
exists of making these parts subject to dropsical effusions. Long after
every other part of the sub-cutaneous texture is infiltrated, this
preserves its ordinary state. I have seen two patients affected with
elephantiasis, where every part of the skin and subjacent texture of
the lower extremities was enormously swelled, except the sole of the
foot. The contrast of this part, remaining in its natural state, with
the top of the foot, which was raised to an enormous swelling, gave
that peculiar appearance that all authors have noticed. At the place
of the annular ligaments, the sub-cutaneous cellular texture is very
compact, and the adhesion of the skin, is also very evident; hence
those contractions that are seen in the limbs of infants at the place
of the ligaments, the fat penetrating but very little into the cells,
that are very closely drawn together.

The sub-cutaneous cellular texture has several different uses. It
furnishes the skin with the great mobility it enjoys, a mobility that
is particularly observable in the great motions of the trunk and
extremities, in the collisions it experiences with external bodies, in
the different tumours that get to a great size, as in sarcocele, which
is often covered at the expense of a part of the integuments of the
penis, the abdomen and the thigh, which are stretched and have a real
locomotion.

It is to this texture also, that the organs subjacent to the skin owe
in part the facility with which they move in the great contractions of
which they are susceptible. The fat contained in great quantity in its
cells, contributes to protect the subjacent parts from the impression
of the external air. We know, that in general this fluid is more
abundant there in winter than in summer, that it is found in a very
considerable proportion under the skin of animals that inhabit cold
countries, that in consequence of the emaciation that follows great
diseases, the impression of the external air is often very sensible, &c.

The serum appears to be in the sub-cutaneous texture, considerably
more than in other parts; it has a greater tendency to accumulate
there, no doubt on account of its laxity. If we compare the quantity
of fluid which enters this texture in a dropsical limb, with that
which occupies the intervals between the muscles and the interstices
of the fibres of the different subjacent organs, we shall see that it
exceeds it considerably, and that the size of the limb is in proportion
much more increased by the dilatation of the portion of sub-cutaneous
cellular texture, than by that of the portions situated deeper. To be
convinced of this, place at the side of a healthy, lower limb, stripped
of its integuments and subjacent texture, a dropsical limb prepared
in the same manner, and consequently having like the other, only its
aponeurotic covering, you will see that the difference is not very
great.


_Sub-mucous cellular texture._

The mucous membranes have the same relations with the cellular texture,
that the skin has, of which they are a continuation, and with which,
as we shall see, they have a great analogy in their structure. There
is then a sub-mucous, as well as a sub-cutaneous texture. But there is
between them, this essential difference, that the texture of the first
is infinitely more compact and condensed than that of the other, and
consequently that the adhesion of the mucous system to the neighbouring
parts is much greater, than that of the cutaneous system. It is to this
difference that may be referred, 1st. the difficulty of dissecting
the mucous membranes and of separating them from the subjacent parts.
2d. The impossibility that I have always found in many successive
experiments, of producing an artificial emphysema in the sub-mucous
texture, whilst I have done it almost every where else, by blowing in
air. 3d. The uniform absence of this fluid in this texture, even when
the natural emphysemas are the most generally spread. 4th. The equally
uniform absence of serum in the sub-mucous cells, in the most general
leucophlegmasia; a phenomenon essential to the functions of the hollow
organs, which would soon be obliterated, if the sub-mucous texture
swelled as much in dropsy as the sub-cutaneous.

Is it to the difference of texture of these two portions of the general
cellular system, that must be referred the much greater frequency of
phlegmonous inflammation in the second than in the first, or is it
that this is less exposed to the exciting causes derived from external
bodies? Both circumstances may have an effect. I believe much more
readily in the first, as the throat, in which is seated, especially
around the amygdalæ, the most lax of all the parts of the sub-mucous
texture, is the most frequent seat of phlegmonous inflammation.

Besides, it is the firm and compact structure of the sub-mucous
texture, which makes it fit to serve as a point of insertion and
termination to that number of fleshy fibres that compose the muscular
membranes of the stomach, the intestines, the bladder, &c. and thus to
fulfil the uses that the tendons have in relation to the muscles of
animal life.


_Sub-serous cellular texture._

There is under almost all the parts of the serous system, as under the
two preceding ones, a cellular layer, which is in general very abundant
and very loose, as we may be convinced by examining it around the
peritoneum, the pleura, the tunica vaginalis, the pericardium, &c. This
quantity of cellular texture is particularly destined to accommodate
the different changes these membranes experience, in dilatation,
in contraction, and in a species of locomotion, of which they are
susceptible under many circumstances. We shall see the peritoneum, for
example, belong at one time to the omentum, at another to the stomach,
according as this last is in a state of fulness or vacuity; now for
these removals, it was necessary that there should be a great degree
of laxity in the surrounding texture. It is to this, that we must
attribute the ease with which the sub-serous texture is penetrated
with water in dropsies, and with air in emphysema. Next to the
sub-cutaneous texture, no part is more disposed to these infiltrations.

There are, however, some places, where the serous membranes adhere in
a very intimate manner to the neighbouring parts. The pericardium in
its two layers, the synovial glands with the cartilages and fibrous
capsules, the tunica arachnoides with the dura mater, offer examples of
this arrangement, which constitutes, when it is with a fibrous membrane
that it makes the adhesion, the sero-fibrous membranes.


_Cellular texture exterior to the arteries._

There is around each artery an extremely compact, condensed, and
resisting layer, which at first sight appears to be a peculiar
membrane, but which evidently belongs to the cellular system. It has
the greatest analogy with that which is under the mucous membranes. It
is never the seat of serous infiltrations. Fat never accumulates there,
and it is never attacked with inflammation. It arises in an insensible
manner from the neighbouring cellular texture, which is gradually
condensed, and intermixed in such a manner, that we can detach it as
a whole, so that it will represent a kind of canal corresponding with
that of the artery which it surrounds and supports. Are the arterial
fibres inserted in this compact texture, as the muscular fibres of the
stomach and intestines are, in the sub-mucous texture? I do not think
they are; for if it was the case, we could not so easily remove the
cellular cylinder that surrounds the arteries; the arterial fibres seem
to be whole circles, and consequently not to have, like the muscular,
two inserted extremities. However, some of these fibres constantly
adhere to the deepest cellular layer, when we remove it; we distinguish
them by their direction and yellowish colour.


_Cellular texture exterior to the veins._

The veins have an external covering analogous to that of the arteries,
but it is in general less thick and compact. It cannot be taken out in
an entire cylinder as easily as that of the arteries. Moreover, it does
not contain fat, and but little serum, and is not subject to dropsical
effusions, but uniformly preserves in all affections its original
state. When we raise by layers this texture which is on the outside of
the coats of the veins, we easily perceive that it is dryer than in
any other part; and I have often been tempted to believe, that it does
not, like that of the arteries, the excretories, and mucous surfaces,
exhale an albuminous fluid which lubricates the other parts of the
cellular system. We shall see that its organization, which is entirely
different, forms an exception in this system.

In examining the cellular cylinder of the veins and arteries,
especially that of the first, it is essential not to confound it with
their filaments, and the numerous nervous branches which come from the
ganglions, and form a very thick net-work around them. The cellular
texture is whiter, the nerves more greyish; this becomes very apparent
after a few days maceration.

I do not speak of the texture external to the absorbents; without doubt
they have one like the veins, but so delicate are these vessels, that
we can say nothing of them founded upon experiment and dissection.


_Cellular texture exterior to the excretory ducts._

All the excretories, the salivary, urinary, spermatic, hepatic,
pancreatic, &c. are evidently surrounded with a layer analogous to the
preceding, entirely distinct from the neighbouring texture, and which
appears to be inserted in it without partaking of its nature; it is
a distinct body, as to its thickness, its form, and its texture. The
filaments that compose it, not being separated in their interstices by
any fluid, remain in contact with each other; so that the whole really
makes a membrane in the form of a canal, which can be easily raised up
like that which surrounds the arteries; it is, however, thicker than
that of the veins.


_Of the cellular system considered in relation to the organs that it
surrounds on all sides._

Except the organs of which we have just spoken, all parts of the
body are surrounded on every side with a cellular layer more or less
abundant, which forms for them, according to the happy expression of
Bordeu, a kind of peculiar atmosphere, an atmosphere in the midst of
which they are immersed, and which serves to insulate them from the
other organs, to interrupt to a certain degree the communications which
would unite them in an intimate manner, which would identify, if we may
so say, the existence of one with the other, if they were in immediate
apposition.

The serous vapour, in which the cellular atmosphere of each organ is
constantly immersed, and the fat which floats there in greater or less
abundance, powerfully assist in this insulation of vitality; both form
for the different organs a line of separation, which, being fluid,
enjoys in a much less degree than them the vital forces, which also in
this point of view, is not at their level, if I may so express myself,
and which is consequently very proper, to interrupt in a certain degree
the vital communications that would otherwise exist. The essential
difference that there is between the peculiar life of the cellular
texture and that of the other organs, renders it also very susceptible
of performing alone like a solid, an analogous use independent of the
fluids it contains.

It is to this insulation of the vitality of the organs by their
surrounding cellular texture, that we can refer in part that of
the diseases, which is only an alteration of this vitality. Every
day we see an affected part contiguous to a sound one, without
communicating to it its disease. A healthy pleura covering the lungs
filled with tubercles, or ulcers, in phthisis; an inflamed peritoneum
corresponding with the intestines, the stomach, the liver, the spleen,
which remain in their natural state; the mucous membranes affected
with catarrhs approaching without danger the numerous parts they
cover; the sub-cutaneous organs remaining free from the innumerable
eruptions of which the skin is the seat; the tunica arachnoides in a
state of suppuration enveloping a healthy brain, and a thousand other
similar facts; these are the phenomena that the examination of bodies
constantly presents. Shall I speak of the different tumours that are
formed in the midst of organs, without their perceiving it, of the
numerous excrescences that grow by their side without affecting them?
Dissect a muscle under a suppurating cutaneous wound, or even a most
obstinate ulcer; you will not often find it different from the rest,
the skin only has been affected. No doubt the difference of vitality
of two neighbouring organs is an essential cause of the insulation
of their diseases; but the cellular atmosphere that protects them is
also an important one. When an organ sends elongations into another,
it communicates to it much more easily its diseases, than if a thick
cellular layer separated them; for example, we know that the affections
of the periosteum and the bone are soon identified.

Let us not, however, exaggerate this idea, by describing the cellular
atmosphere as an insurmountable barrier to diseases. Facts would often
contradict us, by showing diseases passing from an organ to the texture
that surrounds it, and from this texture to the neighbouring organs;
so that we see it at one time an obstacle, and at another the means
of their propagation. The atmosphere that is formed is in different
cases susceptible of being charged with all the emanations that arise
from the organ, or to speak in language more strictly medical and
physiological, the vital forces of an organ being altered, those of the
surrounding texture are often altered by communication, and gradually
those of the different neighbouring organs themselves. This kind of
influence that the organs have upon each other, should be carefully
distinguished from sympathy, in which, a part being diseased, another
part becomes affected without the intermediate ones being deranged
in their functions. Here there is constantly in the communication of
diseases, the same order as in the position of the organs.

A great number of local affections affords us examples of this
dependance, in which an organ and its texture being diseased, the
neighbouring organs afterwards become so. In phlegmon, a more or less
considerable swelling surrounds the red and inflamed place; rheumatism,
which affects the white parts of the wrists and fingers, produces
a painful swelling around them; a considerable tumefaction in the
neighbourhood of the knee is almost always the result of diseases of
the joint, which affect only the ligaments, &c. Many tumours have
around them a kind of diseased atmosphere, an atmosphere which extends
more or less remotely, which always exists in the cellular texture,
and which constantly partakes of the nature of the tumour. If it is
acute, as in phlegmon, it is a simple swelling which disappears almost
entirely at death; as I have often seen in dead bodies an inflamed
part that was very large during life, resume by the loss of the vital
forces, nearly its ordinary size. Is the tumour chronic? it is an
induration more or less evident that affects, oftentimes to a distance,
the neighbourhood of the diseased parts, as we see in most cancers.

This atmosphere of disease is developed not only around the affected
organ, but embraces also the neighbouring ones. The inflammations
of the pleura spread to the lungs, that of the convex surface of
the liver to the diaphragm; pericarditis, by the influence it has on
the fleshy fibres of the heart, produces in this organ the irregular
motions of an intermittent pulse; peritonitis, which is exclusively
confined to the peritoneum, in the beginning, terminates, when it
becomes chronic, by affecting the subjacent intestines; it is this
which forms chronic enteritis, &c.

It should be remarked, however, that mere contiguity without cellular
texture, is often sufficient to communicate disease; for example, a
carious tooth affects its neighbour; the inflamed portion of a serous
membrane, in contact with healthy ones, soon produces inflammation in
them; thus it is, that after inflammation has continued a short time,
though the pain has announced only one point to be primarily affected,
the whole surface is found attacked.

I am convinced that disease is not the only thing, that the cellular
atmosphere of the organs serves to propagate, but it is also the means
of communicating medicinal effects. Why is a blister often useless that
is applied to a remote part in rheumatism, whilst one placed upon the
skin that covers the muscle or the fibrous organ that is the seat of
the disease, frequently produces a sudden effect? Why has a cataplasm
applied to the scrotum oftentimes an influence upon a diseased
testicle, though between the cutaneous organ and this gland there is
no relation of vitality? Why do several other medicines applied also
to the skin, produce an action upon the subjacent parts? The cellular
texture is certainly the means of communication, as in the different
applications made to the mucous membranes. A gargle is advantageous
in inflammations of the tonsils; an emollient enema diminishes that
of the peritoneum, &c.: now these means are not applied directly to
the affected organ; their effects are transmitted by the sub-mucous
texture. However, the advantages of these applications have been much
exaggerated, both when applied to the cutaneous and mucous surfaces,
with a view of acting upon organs of different vitality, and which are
subjacent to these surfaces. Practice too often proves that they may
be excited, and irritated in a certain manner, without the contiguous
organ being affected, because their life and that of the organ has no
resemblance or correspondence, the one is indifferent to the affections
of the other, though the parts are contiguous. Who does not know, how
little effect emollients, discutients, &c. have, upon tumours of the
breast, of the glands of the groin, axilla, &c.? and that they are
as often cured without our applications as they are with? Formerly,
when a tumour appeared projecting under the skin, if it was seated in
the abdominal viscera, and consequently separated from the cutaneous
organ, by many others of a different and even opposite vitality, they
covered it with a poultice. All modern surgeons admit the inutility
of applications made in this way, and now confine them to the most
sub-cutaneous organs. Perhaps hereafter we shall be sufficiently
acquainted with the degree of vitality of each organ, to know when
the cellular texture can be the means of communication of medicinal
effects, between two contiguous organs, with different structure and
properties, and when it is a barrier which stops the communication of
these effects. At present we go almost always groping in the dark.

Frequently a cutaneous application acts by sympathy upon very distant
organs, whilst it has no effect upon neighbouring ones, with which it
has no relation; for example, a bath will check a spasmodic vomiting,
while it will have no sensible effect in diminishing pain which has its
immediate seat in the sub-cutaneous organs.

In general, the vital forces of any organized part are particularly
altered, and consequently its injuries are produced in three ways;
1st. by a direct irritation, as when the conjunctiva is inflamed,
from fresh air, or that filled with irritating exhalations; 2d. by
sympathy, as when one eye being affected, the other becomes so without
any apparent cause; 3d. by cellular communication, as when a bone being
carious, the skin that covers it becomes discoloured, livid and swelled.

Why is the cellular texture, in some cases, the means that nature uses
to defend organs from the influence of that which is diseased, while in
others it serves to propagate morbid affections? Let us limit ourselves
upon this point to the exposition of facts; the research into the
cause, would only be conjecture.

The cellular atmosphere of each organ has relation not only to the
immediate phenomena of its vitality, but also to the different
movements that the organ executes; as this is more abundant, these
movements are more extended. This observation is made, in comparing
that which is in considerable quantities around the heart, the
great arterial trunks, the eye, the womb, the bladder, the great
articulations, as the axilla, the groin, &c. with that which is on the
outside of the tendons, the aponeuroses, the bones, &c. and of which
there is in general only a very small quantity. The extension and
contraction of which its cells are susceptible, make them very proper
to accommodate the great movements of the organs, those especially of
dilatation and contraction, which moreover are favoured by the fluids
that it contains. The organs, upon the external surface of which but
little cellular texture is found, and which, however, perform many
movements, as the stomach, the intestines, the brain, &c. have, to
supply its place, the serous membranes that cover them. These membranes
and the cellular texture are in fact the two great means, and the only
ones, by which nature has facilitated the movements of these organs.

There are many organized parts with obscure motions, but which are
however surrounded with a quantity of cellular texture; the kidnies are
a remarkable example of this. The testicle and its membranes are also
surrounded with a great quantity of this texture; so is the thyroid
gland; the pancreas and salivary glands find it a thick partition
which separates them from the neighbouring organs. In general, almost
all the immoveable parts, which are not of much importance, and which
are not separated from others by serous surfaces, as are almost all
the thoracic and abdominal viscera, are every where surrounded by an
abundant cellular texture.


II. _Of the internal cellular system of each organ._

The cellular texture, after having covered the organs, enters every
where into their intimate structure; it forms one of their principal
elements. In an apparatus, which is an assemblage of many systems,
each of these systems is united to the others by it; thus in the
stomach, the intestines, the bladder, &c. different layers which belong
to it separate the serous, muscular and mucous membranes of these
different hollow organs. In the lungs, between the serous surface
and the pulmonary parenchyma, between this and the divisions of the
bronchia, between them and their mucous surfaces, it offers a variety
of elongations more or less compact.

In the organized systems, the cellular texture at first accompanies
and surrounds, in their whole course, the vascular and nervous
branches which enter into their composition; then it unites together
the different homogeneous parts of each of them. Each fasciculus of a
muscle, every muscular fibre, every nervous filament, every portion of
aponeurosis and ligament, every glandular particle, &c. are surrounded
with a sheath, a particular cellular layer, which in relation to its
parts, is destined to the same uses that the greater covering of which
we have just spoken, performs for the whole organ. Thus the life of
each fibre is insulated by this layer, which, like that of the whole
organ, forms around it a kind of atmosphere, destined to defend and
protect it, but which can, however, like the general layer, and even
more than that, because the parts are nearer to each other, be the
means of the communication of diseases from one fibre to another. The
motion of each of these fibres is peculiarly favoured by the cellular
texture; thus the organs, which, like the muscles, have a very apparent
motion in each of their parts taken separately, are capable by means
of it of a much greater internal contraction, than those which, like
the tendons, the ligaments, and the glands, have no sensible motion but
that which is communicated to them.

The internal cellular texture of each organ has but little of the vital
character which distinguishes that organ; it preserves almost all
its general properties; it is, in the structure of different parts,
the medium which unites without resembling them. We see that it is
insensible in the nerves, without contractility in the muscles, or
powers of secretion in the glands. It is often affected without the
participation of the organ. In many organic affections of the liver,
we meet with steatomatous tumours, which give this organ a raised and
uneven form, and which, occupying only the cellular texture, leave
untouched the glandular texture, which secretes as usual the bile,
which undergoes no alteration in its course. It is remarkable, that
these tumours, oftentimes of enormous size, should exist without
injuring the secretion of bile. They may be compared with those
not less remarkable in the lungs in phthisis, in which, however,
respiration is performed almost the same as in health.

There are many organs, in which the cellular texture is hardly
apparent, because their structure is so compact; some authors have
even denied the existence of it in them. But in many of these organs,
maceration, by filling in an insensible manner the fibres with water,
parts them by degrees, and makes apparent the cellular texture which
separates them, as we see especially in the tendons, in the fibrous
membranes, &c. Ebullition, which takes from some their nutritive
substance, for example gelatine, leaves a membranous residue which
is evidently cellular. In all, even the bones and cartilages, the
production of fleshy points, or granulations, which, as we shall see,
are essentially of a cellular nature, proves the existence of this
internal texture, of which they are only the elongations. The same may
be said of the bones becoming soft, and fleshy, and of fungous tumours
of the other systems, diseases in which this texture becomes very
apparent, because the organ loses by them its compact structure, and
takes one that is more loose and spongy, and which exposes that which
is placed in the interstices of the fibres.


ARTICLE SECOND.

OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM, CONSIDERED INDEPENDENTLY OF THE ORGANS.

After having considered the cellular system in relation to the organs,
let us consider it separate from all the parts that it covers and
penetrates, in order to represent it as a body continued on all sides,
found every where in the interstices of the organs and being analogous
in this point of view to almost all the other primitive systems. Let us
trace it in the head, the trunk, and extremities.


I. _Of the cellular system of the head._

The cranium and face differ extremely as it respects the cellular
texture; it is found in very small quantity in the first, and in great
abundance in the second.


_Cellular texture of the cranium._

The interior of the cranium has but very little cellular texture; it
is even apparently destitute of it. If, however, we raise the tunica
arachnoides, where the vessels enter and where the nerves go out, we
shall find a small quantity, which is remarkable for its delicacy and
transparency. The pia mater is principally formed by this texture, and
the texture of this membrane appears to be continued with that of the
brain; this, however, is extremely hard to be demonstrated; it is not
proved by maceration, and it is scarcely seen except in fungous tumours.

The communications of the cellular texture of the interior of the
cranium are very numerous.

1st. In front it enters the orbit by the optic foramen and the
sphenoidal fissure; hence the redness and heat of the eye in
paraphrenitis,[5] the influence of which is propagated by these
communications, as well as by the continuity of membranes. It enters
the nostrils by the foramina in the cribriform plate; to this perhaps
we may attribute the weight, and pain of the head in coryza.

 [5] The word paraphrenitis is meant probably to designate the
 inflammation of the meninges of the brain, though this term is not
 usually employed by English writers; but the word used by the author
 might be translated inflammation of the diaphragm, which certainly is
 not his meaning. _Tr._

2d. Below, the numerous foramina of the base of the skull effect
communications between the face and the cerebral cellular texture, and
between it and the top of the pharynx, the zygomatic furrow, &c. In
many cases in which angina is attended with pain, and heaviness in the
head, vertigo, &c. I am convinced that it is in a great measure owing
to these communications, though oftentimes it may be wholly sympathetic.

3d. Above and behind, the cerebral texture is continued with that
of the corresponding parts of the head, by the numerous but small
openings in the sutures; it accompanies the vessels that go from the
dura-mater to the pericranium, and it becomes probably sometimes the
means of communication, that is so frequently observed between these
two membranes, when one is inflamed; hence the sudden affection that
frequently takes place of the dura mater, tunica arachnoides, &c. from
a stroke of the sun upon the integuments of the cranium, &c.

The cellular texture, though more abundant on the outside of the
cranium, is not found in great quantity there, no doubt because the
muscles are so few and thin. Its communications with the face are
evident, especially upon the forehead; as a consequence of erisypelas
of the cranium, nothing is more common than to see the eye-lids
receive the pus that is formed, and which often accumulates in these
moveable veils, so as to occasion considerable deposits. It is by
these communications also that serum is deposited there, and blood
extravasated. Behind and upon the sides, the communications of the
cellular texture of the cranium are also very evident.


_Cellular texture of the face._

It is very abundant in every part. The orbits are filled with it;
the excavation of the cheeks, that is bounded by the buccinator and
masseter muscles, the zygomatic and malar bones, contain much of it:
all the neighbouring parts of the tongue are furnished with it. The
nasal cavities only and their sinuses, which a mucous surface covers,
that is almost immediately attached to the bone, have but a small
quantity of it.

The facial cellular texture contributes to the beauty and harmony of
the countenance, the features of which, examined closely, show that
the muscles draw in an unpleasant manner across the skin, when there
is no fat, and consequently that there is too great a depression. In
an opposite state, there is a kind of bloating that is disagreeable;
a middle state is the most favourable to the beauty of the face.
This texture is almost wholly disconnected with expression, which is
effected by the muscles. Thus the different passions are delineated
with nearly the same features upon a fat and a lean face. Only these
features are less marked in the first than the second, because in the
last more wrinkles are formed than in the other, by the contraction of
the same muscles.

The cellular texture is in greater or less quantity in the face in
different people. Every one knows that some are always thin in this
part, who are fat in the rest of the body. From the dissection of the
bodies of such persons, I have found that it arises from the small
quantity of cellular texture it contains in proportion to the other
parts. In other individuals, there is an opposite state, a fulness
of the face with a lean body, a striking contrast, and which arises
without doubt from a cause opposite to the first.

It is to the greater proportion of cellular texture, much more than to
the development of the muscles, that must be attributed the evident
thickness of certain parts of the face, in different species of the
human race, that, for example, of the lips and the alæ of the nose in
negroes, &c. From the same cause arises the variety in thickness in the
great and small labia pudendi.

The principal communications of the facial cellular texture are made
with the neck by the sub-cutaneous portion of this texture, by that
which accompanies the vessels, and particularly in the triangular space
at the superior part of which is situated the parotid gland. Thus, from
deposits made upon the lateral parts of the face, effusions of pus take
place that often extend to the neck. In emphysema, the air of which
comes from the chest, after the neck is swelled, the air passes to the
face principally by the sides. There are still great communications of
cellular texture between the neck and the face, by the spaces between
the muscles that are attached to the base of the tongue.


II. _Cellular system of the trunk._

It varies in its proportions, as we examine the regions of the spine,
the neck, the chest, the abdomen, and pelvis.


_Vertebral cellular texture._

I so call the cellular texture which is found in the neighbourhood of
the spine, and in the vertebral canal.

In the cavity of this canal, there is but very little of it. Between
the tunica arachnoides and the medulla oblongata, between the nervous
elongations that go from the last, and the sheaths of the arachnoides
that accompany them, we see some filaments that follow the course of
the vessels, and contribute to the formation of the pia mater. There
is none of this texture between the arachnoides and dura mater. Below
this, between it and the vertebral canal, in the places where it does
not adhere, there is more of it, especially below, where it is very
loose, and always covered with a fluid that is often reddish.

On the outside of the spine, we see, behind, many muscles and but
little cellular texture in proportion; thus, depositions in this part
are much more rare and much less liable to spread than elsewhere, a
circumstance which arises also from this, that the muscles being very
compact in the vertebral canals, keep in a state of depression the
cellular texture that separates them.

This texture is on the contrary very abundant along the whole course
of the anterior part of the spine, in the neck, where it accompanies
the carotids, in the thorax and abdomen, where it follows the course of
the aorta, the great trunks which go from it, the vena cava, azygos,
&c. There is no part of the animal economy, more frequently exposed to
different collections of pus, than this. Nothing is more common than
to see depositions that are formed at the anterior part of the thorax
and abdomen, projecting at the groin by a channel which we discover
by the examination of bodies. It is principally by these cellular
communications, and by those which are beneath the integuments, that
the superior parts correspond with the inferior, and vice versa.


_Cervical cellular texture._

The neck, which is very muscular, has much cellular texture,
besides that which belongs to the vertebral column. It is
especially in the lateral parts, where the lymphatic glands are
situated, that this texture is remarkable. In the space between the
sterno-cleido-mastoideus and trapezius muscles, where the brachial
nerves arise, and where the vessels pass that go from the thorax, there
is a great quantity of it. It communicates with that of the thorax, by
the large opening that is found at the superior part of this cavity;
hence it happens, that when the cells of the lungs are ruptured, the
escaped air occupies first the chest and then the neck, and hence also
the facility with which we produce the same phenomenon by forcing air
beneath the pleura of a dead body, &c.

The cellular texture of the neck communicates also with that of the
superior extremities above and below the clavicle. Hence why the neck
and consequently the chest, are filled with air, water, and other
fluids that are forced into the sub-cutaneous and intermuscular texture
of these extremities.


_Pectoral cellular texture._

In the pectoral cavity, it is upon the median line that the cellular
texture is especially found; it is abundant in the space formed by the
duplicature of the mediastinum; the neighbourhood of the pericardium
is supplied with it, particularly around the great vessels, which it
accompanies a short distance; the rest of the thorax, occupied by the
lungs, contains much less of it.

The pectoral texture communicates with the abdominal, 1st. by the
different openings of the diaphragm, by that of the aorta, and
particularly of the œsophagus; that of the vena cava being too closely
united to that vessel, to permit these communications easily; 2d. by
the opening of the diaphragmatic fibres, especially by the triangular
space, through which those pass that are attached to the ensiform
cartilage; hence the passage of the deposits from the thorax to the
abdomen. Desault mentions a purulent collection, first formed in
the neck, and which by the anterior mediastinum, became prominent
just above the abdomen. Hence the facility with which the pleura
particularly on the right side receives the influence of diseases
of the peritoneum, when this is diseased on the convex surface of
the liver which always keeps its place, whilst by the motions of the
stomach and the spleen, that which covers those two viscera, which are
constantly changing their situation, has a much less decided influence
upon the left pleura.

The cellular communications of the chest take place also from the
interior to the exterior, by the interstices between the intercostal
muscles, but they are not very evident, as these interstices are very
small; thus the diseases of the breast have rarely any influence out
of this cavity; this happens however when in dropsies and chronic
inflammations of the pleura, the pectoral integuments have an adhesion
to the diseased side.

The exterior cellular texture of the chest, is very abundant above; it
there surrounds the breasts and contributes in part to those rounded
forms that delight us in women, and those prominent ones which we
admire in a well formed man. We see it in great quantities under the
pectoral muscles; below it diminishes in a very evident manner.


_Abdominal cellular texture._

The abdomen contains, in proportion a little more cellular texture
than the thorax. In the interior of this cavity, this texture is
found collected in the places where the great arteries and veins
enter the gastric organs, as in the fissure of the liver, the
mesentery, &c. It is not abundant between the peritoneum and the
anterior and lateral parietes of the abdomen, but it is so on the
posterior part of this membrane, particularly about the kidnies.
This interior texture communicates at first with that of the pelvis,
all around the peritoneum, then with that of the lower extremities,
by different openings, by the inguinal ring and especially by the
crural arch. The first of these openings establishes also a cellular
correspondence between the abdomen and genital organs, particularly
in man. We can easily prove these communications by injecting a
fluid into the abdominal cellular texture of a dead body. This fluid
goes spontaneously to the inferior extremities, whilst it requires a
long continued force to drive it to the superior. All practitioners
know, that there is hardly any case of ascites, in which the lower
extremities are not swelled, while the superior are unaltered. It is
then with the abdominal cellular texture, that that of the inferior
extremities has a particular relation, as it is with the pectoral that
that of the superior corresponds, as has been observed by Bordeu and
Portal. It is to be remarked however, that the first are affected much
more easily in the diseases of the abdomen, than the second are in
those of the chest.


_Cellular texture of the pelvis._

There are but few parts in which the cellular texture is more abundant
than in the pelvis. Around the bladder, rectum and womb there is
a great quantity of it, it is found no where more abundantly. This
appears to me to be the cause of it; that, as these three organs are
subject to great dilatation, and as the osseous parietes of the pelvis
cannot yield to these dilatations, like the abdominal parietes, it
is necessary that something should so act, that in whatever state
the preceding organs may be, the cavity of the pelvis should be
always filled. If the motions of the brain alternately increased and
diminished the size of this organ, the bony cavity of the cranium would
have been lined without doubt with cellular texture.

Besides we know the effect of this large quantity of cellular texture
in the pelvis, in deposits which take place in the neighbourhood of the
anus, in infiltrations of urine which accompany ruptures of the urethra
and bladder. The facility with which pus and urine spread themselves in
this part and the mischief they occasion, are well known.

This texture communicates with that of the inferior extremities by
the ischiatic notch, by the arch of the pubis, &c. Different authors
mention, that effusions of pus and urinous infiltrations extend
downwards by these communications. We can fill the pelvis with air, by
blowing this fluid into the inferior extremities, especially in their
intermuscular texture.

The exterior of the cavity of the pelvis has also much cellular
texture, less however behind than upon the sides, but in front around
the genital organs of man as well as woman, there are large masses,
particularly upon the great labia and the dartos.


III. _Of the cellular system of the extremities._

In the superior and inferior extremities, the quantity of cellular
texture decreases from the superior to the inferior part. Around the
two superior articulations, it is very abundant. The hollow of the
axilla, in which the head of the humerus is situated, and which
is spacious, is almost entirely filled with it. The groin has also
considerable, though less than the axilla. The arm and the thigh have
between their muscles large interstices that are cellular. At the elbow
there is a smaller proportion than at the ham, whose deep cavity has a
considerable quantity; an arrangement that is consequently the reverse
of that of the axilla compared with that of the groin.

In the fore arm and leg, the muscles approach each other in a sensible
manner; their cellular layers are much more compact, the whole cellular
system is less abundant.

Towards the inferior part of these two portions of the limbs, where
almost every thing on the hand and foot are tendinous and fibrous,
the cellular texture diminishes still more, and becomes in proportion
to the motions, hardly sensible. However, the foot, especially on the
sole, contains much more than the palm of the hand, where we see but
little.

This successive decrease of the cellular texture of the limbs is
adapted to the uses of their different parts. In fact the extent of
motion that exists above, requires in the muscles a laxity which they
borrow from the quantity of cellular texture that surrounds them.
Below, the multiplicity and at the same time the limited extent of
the motions of the hand and the foot, of the hand especially which is
destined to adapt itself to the form of external bodies, require in the
organs of these two parts a close juxta-position, for which they are
indebted to the small quantity of cellular texture that exists there.


ARTICLE THIRD.

OF THE FORMS OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM, AND THE FLUIDS IT CONTAINS.


I. _Of the cells._

The general conformation of the cellular texture is not the same every
where. The interstices or cells between the different layers, are
more or less wide; their size is remarkable upon the eyelids and the
scrotum, and in general where there is no fat, or where it is in small
quantity. Moreover the capacity of the cells is extremely variable;
nothing definite can be determined upon this point, as they are capable
of contraction and expansion. When fat and serum fill them, they are
double, triple or even quadruple what they are when they are empty.
It is the variation in the size of the cells of the system of which
we speak, which constitutes all the difference of the general size of
the body in corpulency or emaciation; in each state the size of every
nervous, tendinous fibre, &c. remains nearly the same, and the cellular
system only varies. There is the same variety in leucophlegmasia
compared with the ordinary state of the body.

The figure of the cells is so variable, that we cannot describe them
in a general manner. Round, quadrangular, hexagonal, oval, are found
mixed together. The best way to see these, is to freeze an infiltrated
limb; numerous little icicles are then formed, and show by their form,
that of the cells which they filled. Artificial emphysema is also a
good way; I have often determined by it in our slaughter houses where
they blow meats, the forms of the cells. The injection of melted
gelatine may also be employed; but the results are less certain,
because in going from one cell to another, it breaks the texture; and
moreover after it is hardened, it is difficult to separate each portion
contained in each cell.

All the cells communicate; so that the cellular texture is really
permeable throughout the whole extent of the body, from the feet to
the head. This permeability is proved, 1st. by emphysema spontaneously
produced; 2d. by that which is artificially produced in a living
animal, by blowing air under any portion of the cutaneous organ, an
operation which affects neither the life or health of the animal,
though oftentimes the whole of the body is bloated. We know that
some beggars make use of these means without danger, for the purpose
of exciting compassion. 3d. If one or two punctures are made in a
dropsical limb, it is sometimes wholly emptied in this way. 4th.
Oftentimes this happens from ruptures taking place spontaneously in
limbs of this kind. 5th. Pressure made upon them, makes the fluid
ascend or descend, according to the part upon which it is made. 6th. A
rupture of the bladder or the urethra produces an urinous infiltration,
which sometimes extends even to the sides of the chest. 7th. The
injection of any fluid into the cellular texture of a dead body,
produces an artificial leucophlegmasia.

The permeability of the cellular texture has been much exaggerated,
or rather it has been presented under a point of view different from
that in which it is shown by nature. It is thus that many physicians,
thinking that it could be pervaded indifferently by all the fluids
of the animal economy, have believed that these fluids formed there,
currents in different directions more or less irregular. Thus the sweat
has been considered as the transmission by the skin of the albuminous
fluid of the cellular texture, which, according to some moderns, is
drawn out with the caloric that is constantly disengaged. They have
thought, also, that the permeability of this texture would explain the
rapid passage of drinks to the bladder. They have explained by it too,
the promptness with which sweat is produced by warm liquors, &c.

All these theories, that examination never proves, are repugnant to the
known laws of our economy, laws which show us the fluids constantly
circulating in the vessels, in consequence of the vital forces, of
organic sensibility and contractility which they possess, and not
as being extravasated to move irregularly in the cellular texture.
Moreover, I have never found any portion of drink in the cellular
texture of animals immediately after they have taken it. I have tried
many of these experiments upon dogs, after having deprived them for
some time of drink, that they might drink the more. The cellular
texture in the neighbourhood of the stomach and intestines, that
especially which, placed behind the mesentery, communicates with the
pelvis where the bladder is situated, having been attentively examined,
did not appear to me to contain any fluid; it was analogous to that of
the other parts of the body. Besides, as we shall see hereafter, these
phenomena can be explained in a very natural manner.

The cellular texture is permeable, then, only to fat and lymph; and
yet it appears that but little use is made in an ordinary state of
this permeability by these two fluids, which remain in their cells,
until absorption takes them up. We do not see them pass from one to
another; they are stagnant, if we may so say. It is only in serous
infiltrations, in effusions of pus, in one word, in a morbid state,
that the cellular permeability becomes apparent. We can only consider,
then, the cellular texture as the reservoir, in which are formed the
serum and the fat. After death the cellular texture is every where
penetrated by fluids, which pass not only across the communicating
openings of its cells, but also through the pores which it has, like
all the solids; hence the infiltration of the integuments of the back,
in dead bodies that have been laid upon it for a length of time; hence
also the passage of the bile through the texture, which separates the
gall bladder from the duodenum, and by which means this intestine is
discoloured, &c. &c. But these phenomena have nothing in common with
those that take place in the living body.


II. _Of the serum of the cellular membrane._

The first of the two cellular fluids appears to be the same as that
which is elsewhere furnished by the exhalants and taken up by the
absorbents. The first deposit it in the organs, the second carry it
from them. Thus when we expose to the air condensed by cold any part of
the cellular texture of an animal recently killed and still preserving
its heat, we see a vapour arise which results from the solution of
the serum in this air, a vapour perfectly analogous to a cloud that
transpiration and respiration produce in winter, or even to that which
arises from any aqueous fluid, exposed hot, with a large surface to the
action of fresh air. When the atmosphere is warm the solution takes
place in the same way, but as the vapour is not condensed, there is no
apparent cloud.

The cellular serum varies in quantity in the different regions. Where
there is no fat, as in the scrotum, the eye-lids, the prepuce, &c.
it appears to be a little more abundant than elsewhere. We see also
that these parts are much more disposed to different infiltrations.
In this respect, the scrotum holds the first rank; then come the
eye-lids, afterwards the prepuce, &c. Observe upon this subject, that
the cellular texture exterior to the mucous surfaces, the arteries, the
veins, and excretories, a texture which by the absence of fat resembles
the ordinary, differs from it, however, in this, that serum is never
effused in it.

We cannot judge of the quantity of cellular serum by observations
made upon the dead body, in which the laxity of the parts permits
a transudation of the fluids from all the vessels that pass through
the cellular texture, and which then enter the cells. To estimate
accurately the cellular moisture, I made an animal first emphysematous
below the skin; I made a large incision into this; little blood only
escaped, because the swelling separated the vessels from the course of
the knife. By these means, the cellular texture being laid open, I have
often been convinced that there was much less serum in this texture
than we commonly suppose. I have not observed, that during digestion,
after sleep, and whilst much sweat is exhaled by the cutaneous organ,
three circumstances under which I have repeated these experiments, that
the cellular serum is increased or diminished in a sensible manner.
This fact coincides with what I have stated in my Treatise on the
Membranes, upon the fluid that lubricates the serous surfaces, and the
proportion of which is almost always nearly equal.

We know that in leucophlegmasia, the quantity of cellular serum is much
increased; that it disappears in inflammation, &c.

The nature of this fluid appears to be essentially albuminous;
experiments made upon that of leucophlegmasia show that there is
albumen in it; but has not disease then altered its nature? To be
satisfied in this respect, I first made a dead animal emphysematous,
for the purpose of distending the cells, and to make the alkohol,
which I afterwards injected by a syringe, enter them more easily. Some
minutes after, the skin having been removed, the subjacent texture
presented here and there different whitish flakes. By immersing in
diluted nitric acid the cellular portion of the scrotum of a sound
body that is dead, or which is better, a portion taken directly from a
living animal, we can observe the same thing. It appears, then, that
in health as well as disease, the albumen is one of the essential
principles of the fluid of the cellular texture. I have taken much of
this texture from the scrotum of many bodies, so as to have it separate
from the fat, and I have made it boil in about the same time as nearly
the same quantity of tendinous substance; at the moment of ebullition,
much whitish froth rises upon the water, but little appears in that
which contains the tendons.

Is the nature of the cellular fluid the same as that of the lymph that
circulates in the absorbents? It cannot be doubted but that these
vessels take off this fluid in the cells; it is possible that it is
mixed with other substances, those especially that come from nutrition,
which alter its nature. Chemical analysis is defective upon this point.


III. _Of the cellular fat._

The fat is the second of the fluids for which the cellular texture
serves as a reservoir.


_Natural proportions of the fat._

Very abundant under the skin, around the serous surfaces, the organs
of great motions, &c.; it is wanting, as we have said, upon the penis,
the prepuce, the scrotum, &c. under the mucous surfaces, around the
arteries, the veins, &c. Examined in the interior of the organized
systems, the fat varies in quantity. There is none between the
interstices of the arterial and venous coats. The lymphatic glands do
not appear to contain any. The brain and spinal marrow are destitute of
it. It is always found in the intervals of the nervous fibres; it is
not often very evident; but in dissecting them, an unctuous substance
escapes, which is constant, and which it undoubtedly furnishes. For the
most part, it is in considerable quantity in the muscles, especially
those of animal life; very little of it is seen in those of organic.
In the bones, where there is none, its place is supplied by medullary
substance; the cartilages, the fibrous bodies, the fibro-cartilages,
are almost entirely destitute of it. The glandular system sometimes has
it, as we see it in the parotids, around the pelvis of the kidnies; in
other places, as in the liver, the prostate, &c. there is no trace of
it. The serous and cutaneous systems are never fatty, although much fat
surrounds them. It is the same of the mucous; the epidermis and the
hair never have any of this fluid.

From this we perceive that the interior of the organized systems
contain in general but very little fat. The different apparatus have
but a small proportion between their various parts. It is thus that
between the coats of the stomach, the intestines, the bladder, &c.
between the periosteum and the bone, between that and the cartilage,
between the muscle and the tendon, &c. this fluid is almost always
wanting.

It follows from this that it is principally in the interstices, which
the different apparatus leave between them, that fat accumulates in
cellular reservoirs. Now by examining the different regions, in this
point of view, we see, 1st. that upon the head, the cranium and face
have an inverse arrangement; that it is very abundant in the second,
and wanting in the first, especially in the interior; 2d. that the
neck contains a considerable proportion; 3d. that in the thorax we
see very little around the lungs, but much about the heart; that upon
the exterior of this cavity, the superior part has a considerable
quantity around the breasts; 4th. that in the abdomen, it particularly
abounds in the posterior part in the neighbourhood of the kidnies,
the mesentery, and omentum; 5th. that in the pelvis, there is much
of it near the bladder and rectum; 6th. that upon the extremities it
is found, like the cellular texture, more abundant above and in the
vicinity of the great articulations, &c.

We observe in infancy, that the quantity of fat is in proportion much
more considerable under the skin, than any where else, especially that
in the abdomen the cellular viscera, the omentum in particular contains
but very little at this age. I have established this fact in a great
many instances. There are only some flakes of fat around the kidney,
frequently these are scarcely visible. All the rest of the abdominal
cavity is destitute of it. The pectoral cavity contains scarcely any
more, and always much less in proportion than in after life. I have
observed also that the intermuscular texture is almost every where
deprived of it. We may say, then, that all this fluid is concentrated
under the skin, at least while the fœtus is in good health. Does this
superabundance of sub-cutaneous fat perform any important office? has
it any connexion with the great size of the liver at that period?
I know not: it is a phenomenon that should fix the attention of
physiologists, especially when it is compared with the absence of fat
in almost all the parts where it is afterwards accumulated.

Towards adult age, the abdominal fat is in much greater proportion
than the sub-cutaneous. The exterior swelling is as rare towards the
fortieth year, as it is common about the fourth and fifth, a period
at which all the muscular forms are concealed by the superabundance
of fat, and the body is remarkably rounded. Is there any connexion
between the large quantity of abdominal fat at the adult period, and
the frequency of diseases of which this region is then the seat?

However, the proportions of fat for the different ages are not always
the same; there are some exceptions.

In old age almost all the fat is dissolved and disappears; the body is
wrinkled, hardened, and becomes thin.


_Unnatural proportions of fat._

Oftentimes the fat accumulates in very great quantity in the cellular
texture. I will not cite examples of those enormous collections, of
which different authors have given a number of cases; this would be
superfluous. I shall only observe, that this state of great corpulency,
far from being a sign of health, indicates almost always a weakness
of the absorbents which are destined to take off the fat, and has,
in this point of view, much greater analogy to serous infiltrations
than we commonly think. Different facts establish this assertion. 1st.
Every kind of unnatural corpulency is accompanied with a debility
of the muscular power, with a state of lassitude and languor of the
individual who is the subject of it. 2d. In a man in whom strength and
activity predominate, we do not see this fatty enlargement that hides
the prominences of the muscles; these are distinctly marked. It is
necessary to distinguish carefully the size of the body which arises
from cellular fat, from that which is the consequence of the proper
development and nutrition of the organs. 3d. Oftentimes the causes
which evidently weaken the powers of life, produce a considerable
quantity of fat; such as inactivity, rest, great and long continued
hemorrhage, convalescence from certain acute diseases, in which the
powers still languish, though fat abounds. 4th. A fatty state of the
muscles is a state of evident weakness in them. 5th. I have been
sometimes convinced, in examining atrophous limbs, that the small size
which they retain is owing in part to the fat, which is in proportion
almost equal to that of sound limbs, whilst all the other parts, the
muscles in particular, are contracted and hardened. 6th. Castration,
which takes from the vital powers a part of their activity, from
nutrition a part of its energy, is very often marked by excessive
corpulency. 7th. On the other hand, as a certain degree of development
of the vital powers is necessary for generation, individuals who are
too fat, in whom this degree is wanting, are in general not fitted for
this function. In woman, this fact is remarkable, it is not less so
in man. In other animals we make the same observation. As fowls are
fattened for the table, they cease to lay eggs. Most domestic animals
are governed by the same law. We should say that there is a constant
relation between the secretion of semen and the exhalation of fat, and
that these two fluids are in an inverse ratio to each other.

We may conclude from these facts, that if the moderate exhalation of
fat indicates strength, its superabundance is almost always a sign of
weakness, and that there is in this point of view a kind of connexion
between fatty and serous infiltrations, as I have mentioned before.
It should be observed, however, that leucophlegmasia almost always
arises from an organic disease of some of the viscera, particularly
the heart, the lungs, the liver, the womb, and the spleen; hence it is
usually incurable, and death is the consequence of the organic disease.
On the other hand, an organic disease rarely accompanies corpulency,
which does not prevent a long life. If leucophlegmasia arose only
from cellular weakness, I am persuaded that it would not disturb the
regularity of the functions.

Great fatty collections are oftentimes an effect almost instantaneous
of certain circumstances, for example, of atmospheric influence. It
is thus that in twenty-four hours, a fog fattens thrushes, ortolans,
red-throats, &c. so that they are unable to escape the sportsman. This
phenomenon, which is very frequent in autumn, is never so striking in
the human species.

The diminution of the fat is as frequent as its increase, and it may be
said that there are more cases of extreme emaciation than of remarkable
corpulency. The causes which diminish this fluid are these: 1st. long
abstinence; the necessary fasting and sleep of dormant animals, furnish
us with an example of this; so that in this point of view, fat is the
nourishment which is reserved for the time when the ordinary kind is
taken away; 2d. every organic disease, continued for a long time, as
phthisis, cancer of the pylorus and womb, disorders of the liver,
of the heart, &c.; those who are in the habit of examining bodies
can judge by the external appearance, without knowing the previous
disease, whether the organization of an essential part is changed. In
general, in organic affections, there is not only emaciation, but also
an alteration in the nutrition of the organs; they are more slender
than usual. On the other hand, after an acute fever that has lasted
only a few days, emaciation only is observed; nutrition, a function
that is deranged as it is exercised, that is to say, slowly, is not
yet sensibly affected. There is in this respect a great difference
between two bodies equally emaciated; it is sufficient, in most cases,
to dissect a limb of each, without seeing the internal viscera, to
determine if death has been the gradual effect of an organic disease,
or the sudden result of a bilious or putrid fever, &c. To the causes
already pointed out, we must add, 3d. every considerable purulent
collection, especially if it depends upon a chronic affection; 4th.
leucophlegmasia, though we must not believe that fat and serum mutually
exclude each other, since we often observe much sub-cutaneous fat in
dropsical subjects; 5th. all melancholy affections of the mind which
have an influence especially upon the internal life, and which affect
the organs of it more particularly than those of external life; 6th.
long-continued efforts of the mind, which in a particular manner affect
the brain, consequently the first effect is upon animal life, though
I have observed that an injury of the functions of this life has less
effect upon corpulency than that of the functions of the other; 7th.
all evacuations unnaturally increased, as those of the bile, the
urine, the saliva, &c.; too frequent emissions of semen, &c. catarrhs,
those especially that are seated on large surfaces, as the pulmonary,
intestinal, &c.; 8th. long heat of summer, compared with the cold of
winter, which is in general favourable to an increase of fat; 9th.
running, hard labour, fatigue of every kind; 10th. long diseases,
those especially where it is necessary to use only weak aliments,
and not being able to continue even these for a long time; 11th.
long-continued watchfulness; long sleep producing a contrary effect,
that of increasing the fat; 12th. the immoderate use of spirituous
liquors, &c. &c.; 13th. the use of acrid and spicy aliments, of those
which have opposite properties to the farinaceous, &c. &c.

I do not cite a great number of the causes of emaciation; after these
it will be easily perceived what are omitted. I would only remark,
that almost all may be referred to two principles, viz. 1st. a general
weakness of the powers, a weakness that acts upon the cellular system,
as upon all the others, and produces there this phenomenon; 2d. a
partial weakness of this system, a weakness arising from the affection
of some other organ, whose action seems to increase at the expense of
that of the cellular texture.


_Different states of the fat._

The fat is almost always solid and coagulated in dead bodies, but in
the living it approaches nearer a liquid state, at least in certain
parts, as around the heart, the great vessels, &c. Under the skin it
has uniformly more consistence. In many experiments, where I have
had occasion to open living animals with red and warm blood, I have
never found it exactly flowing as it is when it is melted, though
many authors have pretended that it is so, an opinion founded upon
the belief that the vital heat would keep it melted. Undoubtedly a
degree of heat equal to that of our bodies, acting upon fat out of the
body, would make it much more fluid than it is in the living subject.
Besides, we know that the temperature is nearly uniform, and that the
degrees of the consistence of fat vary remarkably. There is a great
difference between that of the omentum, which is among the most fluid
of the economy, and that of the neighbourhood of the kidnies, the skin,
which is much firmer. Many animals with red and cold blood have liquid
fat.

In general, it appears that the nature and state of this fluid are
not the same in all the regions; that the fat of the abdomen, thorax
and brain differs from each other, though there is no precise rule
concerning these differences.

In young animals the fat is white and very consistent after death. It
is this consistence that gives to the external covering of the human
fœtus, a remarkable firmness and condensation, whilst in the adult
the skin of a dead body is flaccid and loose, yields to the least
communicated motion on account of the state of the sub-cutaneous fat.
This fat in the fœtus is formed into little globules more or less
rounded, which give the whole a granulated appearance. Oftentimes it
even forms considerable masses; for example there is almost always at
this period, between the buccinator, the masseter and the integuments,
a ball of fat, which is separate from the surrounding fat, and can be
taken out whole. It contributes very much to the remarkable prominence
the cheeks have at this period of life.

Fat becomes yellow as we advance in years, and acquires a peculiar
smell and taste. In comparing that of veal with that of beef, we
readily perceive the difference on our tables. In the dissecting room,
this difference is not less remarkable between a subject of ten years
and one of sixty.

Instead of fat, we often find around the heart of dropsical and
phthisical patients, and of all those who have died of a disease, in
which there has been a constant and protracted weakness, a yellowish
substance, transparent and fluid, having a gelatinous appearance,
and which however, approaches near the character of albumen. This
substance also occupies in similar cases other parts; but it is less
frequent there. It appears to be gelatinous rather than oily.


_Exhalation of fat._

Different hypotheses have been proposed concerning the manner in which
fat is separated from the blood. Malphigi spoke of glands and excretory
ducts, which no anatomist since his time has seen and which no one
believes in at present. Haller supposed that the fat was completely
formed in the arterial system, that it circulated with the blood
and floated on its surface on account of its specific levity. This
circulating fat then, according to him, escaped through the pores of
the arteries, and oozed from all parts into the neighbouring cellular
texture. This opinion supposes two things; 1st. the existence of fat
ready formed in the arterial system, an existence that is proved
by no positive fact, of which I never could convince myself by the
examination of red blood as it comes out of the vessels, for if it did
exist there would be numerous little drops floating on its surface
at the moment it was drawn. In my experiments upon the colouring of
the blood, I have frequently established this; I have observed it
also in examining the blood of maniacs upon whom arteriotomy has been
performed at the Hôtel Dieu. 2d. The opinion of Haller is founded upon
a transudation truly mechanical, a transudation that easily takes
place in dead bodies, but never in living. In fact, if we lay bare
an artery of a living animal, separate it entirely from every thing
else, and examine it ever so long, we shall discover no oozing of fat
through its coats, though the blood circulates in it as usual. There
is an infinity of arteries, spread in the cellular texture, through
which fat never transudes, as we see in the scrotum, the eyelids, &c.;
now in these places the arteries are organized as elsewhere, and they
ought therefore to have the fat ready formed in the blood that they
circulate; then, according to Haller, fat would be deposited there.
Besides, we shall see under the article upon exhalations, that this
transudation through the pores of the arteries, whatever fluid is
supposed to be transuded is evidently repugnant to the laws of the
animal economy. I refer then to this article, to establish the fallacy
of Haller's opinion; under that article we shall see also, that the fat
is separated by an exhalation analogous to that of all other exhaled
fluids, that is to say, by the vessels of a particular order, which are
intermediate between the extremities of the arteries and the cellular
texture. Some authors have thought that they saw the vessels that carry
the fat, and have designated them under the name of adipose; but it
appears, that like the other exhalants, they are invisible and can
only be proved by a train of reasoning, which however, satisfactorily
establishes their existence. We can apply to the exhalants of fat, what
will be said upon the exhalant system in general.

I will not treat of the chemical nature of fat, of the acid it
contains, of the particular alterations it undergoes under different
circumstances, that for example, that it experiences when animal
substances that contain it, such as the skin, the muscles, &c. are for
a long time macerated in water. This would lead me into details foreign
to this work. Besides, I could add nothing to what modern chemists have
said upon this subject.

I will terminate this article with an important remark; it is this,
that in those parts which nature has deprived of fat, it would have
injured their functions. The penis increased in size by it, would not
have had a proper relation to the vagina. The eyelids loaded with
fat could scarcely be raised. Accumulated in the sub-mucous texture,
it would have contracted the cavity of the organs which the mucous
surfaces line. Spread in that which surrounds the arteries, the veins
and the excretories, it would have obstructed the caliber of these
vessels; and here observe, that its uniform absence in the sub-arterial
texture is a proof against the opinion of Haller upon its transudation.
Accumulated in the cerebral cavity, it would have compressed the brain
on account of the resistance of the bony parietes of the cranium, &c.
which do not yield like those of the abdomen, when the gastric viscera
are loaded with fat. In the thorax, the diaphragm can descend, and the
lungs can without danger occupy less space when there is considerable
fat exhaled in the mediastinum. This remark, applicable also to the
serum, explains an important phenomenon in diseases, viz. that a
very small quantity of fluid poured out upon the tunica arachnoides
can disturb the functions of the brain, whilst a great effusion is
unattended with danger in the abdomen or the thorax.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

ORGANIZATION OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM.

The cellular system, like almost all the others, is composed of a
peculiar texture and of common parts.


I. _Of the texture peculiar to the organization of the cellular system._

Much has been written upon the nature of this texture; Bordeu has
given some vague ideas upon it, but no experiments. Fontana has made
researches which lead but to few results, upon its intimate structure
and upon the tortuous cylinders of which, according to him, it is
an assemblage. Let us throw aside all hypotheses that examination
does not support; let us follow nature in the phenomena of structure
that she shows us, and not in those she wishes to conceal. In thus
considering the cellular texture, we see that it is very different from
a species of glue, with which some have wished to compare it. It is
an assemblage of many whitish filaments, crossing very often certain
kinds of delicate layers, which form cells with these filaments. To see
this organization well, a piece of the cellular portion of the scrotum
should be taken, which has no fat, and whose texture is consequently
not concealed by this fluid; this portion being stretched into a
kind of membrane, is seen very distinctly. Then there may be plainly
distinguished, 1st. a transparent net-work, arranged in layers, which
makes the foundation, if we may so say, and the tenuity of which is
such, that it has been aptly compared by a physiologist, to the soap
bubbles that are thrown into the air with a pipe. It is impossible
to distinguish, by the naked eye, any fibre in the texture of these
layers; every thing is there uniform. 2d. They are very evidently
crossed by numerous filaments, which running in all directions, are
interwoven in every way, all of which touch, when the cellular texture
is pressed together, but when stretched out, there can be seen between
them the layers of which I have just spoken. The more it is extended,
the larger consequently the membrane becomes, the interstices between
the filaments are greater, and the intermediate layers are also more
apparent.

What is the nature of these filaments? I presume that some are
absorbents, others exhalants, and that many are formed in the places
where the layers unite together for the formation of the cells. As the
thickness arising from this union is greater, they are distinguished
by more evident lines upon the cellular texture stretched into a
membrane. What induces me to believe this, is, that when, instead of
examining the cellular texture upon a portion taken from the scrotum,
and stretched as I have described, it is observed in an artificial
emphysema, as in that of the slaughter-houses for example, then there
is seen upon the covering of each cell, only the non-filamentous layers
of which I have spoken, without any of those filaments that were seen
crossing it in the other method.

These layers have not the same thickness in all cases; quite dense when
the cellular texture is contracted, they become, when it is distended
with air or any other means, so fine and attenuated, that the mind
cannot conceive that there is any thing organized in them. Their
organization is real, however, though some have doubted it. What in
fact is a texture that is nourished, inflames and suppurates, which is
the seat of very distinct vital functions, and which evidently lives,
if it is not an organic texture? All these vague ideas of concrete
juices, of inorganic glue, of hardened juice, that have been applied to
the cellular texture, have no solid foundation, and rest neither upon
experiment or observation, and ought to be banished from a science in
which imagination is nothing, and facts every thing.

The cellular texture has essential differences of organization;
everywhere where fat or serum is accumulated, there are real cells
which have little sacs communicating with each other, which form
reservoirs, the sides of which are composed of the transparent and
non-filamentous layers of which we have spoken; it is in these sacs
that the serous and fatty depositions take place. On the other hand,
in the sub-mucous texture, in that which forms the external membrane
of arteries, veins, and excretories, there are none of these sacs, no
cells, properly speaking, and no layers to form them. When we carefully
raise this texture, and lift it from the surface upon which it is
applied, and draw it a little so as to show its structure, we shall
see very distinctly numerous filaments interwoven every way, forming
a true net-work, meshes, if I may so express myself, but not sacs and
cavities. The air distends this net-work when it is driven forcibly
into the neighbouring texture; but as soon as an opening is made near
it, it escapes, and the texture sinks down; when accumulated in the
ordinary texture, the sub-cutaneous, intermuscular, &c. it remains in
the cells, notwithstanding they have been in part opened, without doubt
because the communicating openings are very small. This fact is evident
in markets, where we see the cellular texture blown up, around the
meats that are stripped of their skin.

It appears that the filaments that are interwoven in every way, and
which form about the vessels and under the mucous surfaces, a cellular
net-work, are really of the same nature as those spread in different
directions in the membranous layers which make the cells, only they are
nearer together, and are by themselves.

After what I have said, it is evident that there are two things in the
common cellular texture; 1st. a number of fine, transparent layers,
found everywhere where the texture is loose, capable of yielding
suddenly to different distensions, and of retaining the fluids its
cells contain, &c.: 2d. filaments intermixed with these layers wherever
they are, and existing alone in certain places. These layers and
cellular filaments have a remarkable tendency to absorb atmospheric
moisture. We observe it in dissecting rooms, where a subject dry and
easy to dissect in the morning, is often much infiltrated by evening,
if the weather has been damp; now this infiltration takes place in the
cellular system, which is a real hygrometer.


_Composition of the cellular texture._

Chemists have placed this texture in the general class of white organs,
among those which furnish a great quantity of gelatine. It has this in
fact, and we obtain by a solution of tannin a remarkable precipitate
from the water in which this texture has been boiled, without any
foreign organs except the vessels that run through it, as, for example,
that of the scrotum. I have made this experiment. But, however,
different re-agents act very differently upon this texture, as they do
upon the fibrous, cutaneous, cartilaginous textures, &c.

Exposed to the action of the air, the cellular texture dries quickly,
but without taking the yellowish colour of the fibrous texture; it
remains white. When it is dried in considerable layers, its cells
adhere together, and these layers being stretched a little to
facilitate the drying, represent a true serous membrane, so that it
would be impossible to distinguish it from one dried in the same way.
In this state the cellular texture is pliable; it can be bent with
great ease in every direction; it has not the stiffness of dried
fibrous texture; when immersed again in water, it takes but imperfectly
its former appearance; its cells are separated with difficulty.

Exposed to putrefaction with other animal substances, it yields to it
less readily than many of them, for example, than the glandular and
muscular organs; filled with the putrefactive juices it does not become
pulpy until some time after these parts. This fact is particularly
remarkable in the sub-mucous texture, in that which surrounds the
vessels; the filaments that compose it, resist much longer than the
other parts of the cellular system, the putrefactive process.

The same may be said of maceration as of the preceding phenomena.
In looking at a tendon and a portion of cellular texture, who would
say that the action of water would soften the first quicker than the
second? the one being soft and almost fluid, and the other compact.
After remaining in water three months, of the temperature of a cellar,
the cellular texture of the arteries did not appear to me to have
undergone any alteration. The sub-cutaneous, the sub-serous, the
intermuscular textures, &c. are changed sooner, but not so soon as
that of some other organs. I have kept for six months, in a glass
vessel, some nerves, which as we shall see, are not altered in water;
the texture which separated the fibres of these, was as firm and
distinct as at first. This resistance to the action of water is less,
when the cellular texture is macerated with organs that soon yield and
become pulpy, than when it is exposed alone. This resistance is the
more remarkable, as this texture, being very fine, is accessible at
many points to the contact of the fluid. If the texture of tendons, of
cartilages, of aponeuroses, of the skin, &c. was arranged in layers as
fine and as much separated, I am satisfied that three or four days of
maceration would be sufficient to reduce them to a mere pulp.

As much may be said of ebullition; a few minutes would be sufficient to
dissipate and melt into gelatine most of the white textures, if they
were arranged in layers as fine as the cellular system; this, however,
resists a long time; different layers are still seen between the fibres
of the boiled muscles. The fat which remains in parcels among the
fleshy fibres, after the boiling, would have been melted, if it had not
been contained in cells which continue untouched; we can, moreover,
be easily convinced of the existence of these layers in the parcels
of fat. It is especially upon the texture exterior to the arteries,
the excretories, &c. that the action of boiling water is longest in
producing an effect.

The cellular texture that is boiled exhibits phenomena analogous to
other organs treated in the same way. 1st. At the instant of boiling,
when an albuminous froth rises upon the water that contains it, it
remains soft, and about the same it was at first. 2d. When this
froth is formed, it becomes hard, is crisped and contracted in size.
The hardening increases until it boils, which takes place almost
immediately. In this state the texture is firmer; it has become
elastic; if drawn in an opposite direction, it suddenly returns, which
it would not do before. 3d. Ebullition being continued, it gradually
softens and loses the hardness it had acquired; then it can hardly
be extended at all; it may be much elongated without breaking, in a
natural state, the rupture of it is now the effect of the least effort.
4th. In fine, by the continued action of boiling water, it gradually
melts. I have remarked, that it does not in any period of ebullition,
assume the yellowish tinge, which is spread over the whole of the
fibrous system when boiled.

From the phenomena that cellular texture offers when exposed to the
action of dry and moist air, of cold and boiling water, &c. I presume
that it is less easily changed by the gastric juices than many others,
the muscular texture, for example; besides, the following facts prove
this. 1st. The taste, almost always a certain index which nature has
given us to judge of digestible aliments, is much less gratified with
the cellular texture that is mixed with cooked meat, than with the
meat itself. 2d. I have made this experiment upon myself; when my
stomach contained a sufficient quantity of food, I excited vomiting
nearly an hour after eating; when it contained but little, I could not
vomit without taking a large quantity of warm water; I then threw up
this and with it the aliments the stomach contained. I have frequently
ascertained by these means, especially by the last, that the cellular
lumps which are found with the fleshy fibres of boiled meat, are much
longer in being altered than the fibres themselves; these last have
become pulpy before the others are acted upon. The fat, which generally
fills these cellular lumps, may have an influence also in this
phenomenon. 3d. I have made the same observation upon dogs that I have
opened at different periods of digestion to determine the difference of
the bile in the cystic and hepatic ducts, a difference of which I have
already given some account.

How can the cellular texture unite to the softness and delicacy that
characterize it, a greater resistance to the different re-agents, than
that of other textures much more firm?

We know that in those who are drowned, a great quantity of gas
disengaged from different organs, from those especially that contain
much blood, as the muscles, the glands, &c. fills the cellular
texture, renders it emphysematous and makes the body float. This
does not so often take place in the open air, where putrefaction is
sudden and where there is a discolouration and disorganization of
parts. The tendons, the aponeuroses, the cartilages, the bones, &c.
have appeared to me in animals drowned for the purpose, not to assist
in the production of this gas. The cellular texture itself has less
part in it, I think, than the organs before pointed out. It would be
easy to know the kind of gas that each organized system furnishes, by
macerating these systems separately in closed vessels, so arranged that
their aeriform products might be collected. If each has a peculiar mode
of putrefaction and gangrene, &c. if in this state their appearance is
different, it is presumable that the products that escape from them are
also different.

In dead bodies that are buried, and beyond the reach of the air, the
emphysematous swelling often takes place, and it is sometimes so
powerful, as I have observed in a church-yard, that it will raise the
lid of the coffin, though it may be covered with half a foot of earth,
which raises it then above the level of the earth that covers the other
coffins.


II. _Parts common to the organization of the cellular system. Blood
vessels._

We must not judge of the vessels of the cellular texture by injections.
When they are fine and have succeeded well, a thousand different
threads interlaced in every way, destroy its whitish colour and change
it into a vascular net-work. The appearance of a body thus injected
is deceptive; it arises from this, that the exhalants have admitted a
fluid forced through the arteries, whilst their own sensibility would
repulse the blood in an ordinary state. In dissecting the cellular
texture upon a living animal, it is seen to be white as in the dead
body, and that great trunks that do not belong to it, send off in
passing through it different branches and ramifications that are
evidently lost in it. In raising the skin from the subjacent organs,
the sub-cutaneous texture is distended, and we may clearly distinguish
in it different little branches that end there; this is remarkable
in dogs. By first making the cellular texture emphysematous, the
experiment succeeds better. We see, also, very well in this way, that
the blood varies in the vessels; often after being exposed sometime to
the air, there appears double the number of them there was when it was
laid bare. There are always remarkable variations, if the place that
is denuded is examined even for a short time; it is the blood retained
in the exhalants, and it seems thus to increase the number of little
arteries.


_Exhalants._

The existence of the exhalants is rendered evident, 1st. by the
preceding experiment, which is a natural manner of injecting them; 2d.
by artificial injections, which shows there many more vessels than
ordinary; 3d. by transudations that sometimes take place in the cells,
when these injections are driven with much force, transudations that
really form an artificial exhalation; 4th. by natural exhalation, which
is continually going on, and which has for its materials the fat and
the serum; 5th. by accidental exhalations that sometimes take place, as
when the blood is diffused in and colours serous infiltrations, &c.

Few systems in the living economy are furnished with a greater number
of exhalants; I do not speak of those that contribute to its nutrition
and that are consequently found there as in all other organs. The
superabundance of these vessels is owing to the continual exhalation
that is going on there. It is this superabundance which renders, as
we shall see, inflammation so much more frequent in a part where the
cellular texture is in the greatest abundance; it is this that exposes
it to that variety of alterations, in which its texture, loaded with
the different substances it exhales, has a firm appearance, and offers
at one time a fatty substance, at another a gelatinous one, sometimes a
species of scirrhus, &c. &c.


_Absorbents._

The absorbents correspond with the exhalants in the cellular system;
the eye cannot trace them, injections would not reach them. But their
existence there is proved, 1st. by the natural and constant absorption
of fat and serum; 2d. by the more manifest one that produces resolution
of serous infiltrations in dropsies, sanguineous in ecchymosis,
purulent in the different kinds of abscesses that are removed; 3d.
by the disappearance of mild fluids injected into these cells, an
effect that must be owing to the agency of these vessels; 4th. by the
resolution of natural and artificial emphysema, in which the air, or at
least the principles that constitute it, have no other way of escaping.
This is evident when the emphysema arises from a rupture of a bronchial
cell, and when a very little opening is made in the animal, it is
stopped after the air is driven by it into the sub-cutaneous texture;
this I have convinced myself of. 5th. The drying up of external ulcers
is owing to the cellular absorbents. Oftentimes in phthisis the ulcers
are suddenly emptied, and we find in the subject who dies immediately,
only the place that was occupied by pus or sanies; I have already
known two patients to die in this way by a re-absorption almost
instantaneous and exactly analogous to that of external ulcers. 6th.
Where there is the most cellular texture, we meet with the greatest
number of absorbents, and the most of those bodies with a glandular
appearance, in which these vessels ramify. Where the cellular texture
is scarcely discoverable, as in the brain, we can with difficulty see
the absorbent system, &c.

We must consider, then, the cellular system as the principal origin of
the absorbents, of those especially which serve to carry the lymph.
These vessels and the exhalants appear to contribute particularly
to the formation of its structure. Many have thought that it was
exclusively formed of them; but this is not founded either upon
observation or dissection. We see a transparent filamentous texture,
and nothing more. Each cell is a reservoir intermediate between the
exhalants that terminate and the absorbents that arise there. They are
in a small way what the serous sacs are in a large one. We do not see
the orifice of either set of vessels.


_Nerves._

We see many nerves running through the cellular texture. But do these
filaments stop there? Dissection affords no light upon the subject; it
arises perhaps from this, that these filaments being white like the
texture, we cannot see them at their termination as well as we can the
arterial branches, which are rendered apparent by their colour, when
they contain red blood.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

PROPERTIES OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM.


I. _Properties of texture._

The properties of texture are strongly characterized in the cellular
system.


_Extensibility._

Extensibility is proved in a variety of cases, as in œdema, in the
accumulation of fat, and in different tumours, in which the cells are
much spread and the membranes remarkably elongated. All the natural
motions suppose this extensibility; the arm cannot be raised without
the texture of the axilla acquiring an extent double, or even treble,
what it has when the arm is down. The flexion and extension of the
thigh, of the neck, and of almost all the parts, exhibit in different
degrees analogous phenomena. If we raise any organ from those to which
it is contiguous, the intermediate texture is considerably elongated.

The degrees of the extensibility of the cellular texture vary. In the
sub-cutaneous, the sub-serous, the intermuscular, &c. this property
has much more extended limits than in the sub-mucous layer, in that
exterior to the arteries, the veins, and the excretories. It exists,
however, in this, as is proved by the dilatations of the gastric
viscera, aneurisms, varices, &c. But these phenomena themselves prove
the greater difficulty of extension in this species of texture; for
example, the ordinary texture would be incapable of resisting the
impulse of the blood after the rupture of the coats of the artery.
There would be a sudden, enormous, and often fatal dilatation, if the
arteries were only surrounded by this. It is the thickness of that
which covers them, which makes the progress of these tumours slow and
gradual.

It is in fact an essential character of the extensibility of almost all
the cellular system in which the layers and consequently the cells are
united, to have the power always of being put suddenly in action and in
an instantaneous manner. We have an example of this kind of extension
in emphysemas artificially produced, which make this texture go
suddenly from a state of perfect contraction to the greatest extension
of which it is capable. The artificial injection of different fluids
exhibits the same phenomenon. We observe it also as a consequence of
fractures, and contusions of the limbs, in which we sometimes see
enormous swellings appear in a manner almost as sudden. The cellular
texture is evidently the seat of those swellings which take place in
that texture which is sub-cutaneous, and not in that subjacent to the
aponeuroses, because the extensibility of these membranes not being
capable of being suddenly put into action, resists all dilatation
that is not gradually made. Many other organs, as the tendons, the
cartilages, the bones, &c. though possessing, like the cellular
texture, extensibility of texture, differ from it like the aponeuroses,
in the impossibility of being suddenly distended. In general, the
softness of the primitive structure appears to have great influence
upon this modification of extensibility.

The cellular texture, extended too far, becomes at first very thin, and
then breaks. In a natural state, no motion of the economy is capable
of being carried so far as to occasion this; for example, I have
remarked in regard to cellular texture taken from the axilla, that it
is necessary to extend it at least three times as far as it is in the
elevation of the arm, to produce this phenomenon. Besides, what opposes
also this rupture, is a kind of locomotion of which it is capable; so
that if too violently drawn, it displaces that which is contiguous
to it, draws it towards itself, and thus becomes less stretched. We
see this phenomenon in a remarkable manner in the swellings of the
testicle, in large hydrocele. Then all the surrounding texture, that of
the lower part of the abdomen, the top of the thighs, and the perinæum,
drawn by that which immediately covers the tumour, is thus brought also
upon it.

I have observed that the inflamed cellular texture loses in part this
property, and that upon the dead body it breaks with great ease. This
takes place also in different indurations of which it is the seat. For
example, that surrounding a cancerous womb, being swelled, loses the
capacity of being extended; it is brittle, if I may be allowed to use
the word; the least effort is sufficient to break it. This fact is
uniform in all cancerous affections, somewhat advanced, of the womb and
in those of many other organs.


_Contractility._

Contractility of texture always takes place in the cellular system when
extension ceases. Thus in emaciation, in the resolution of dropsy and
of tumours, the cells contract and lose a great part of the capacity
they had acquired; in a wound which has affected the cellular texture
as well as the skin, the edges separate, and a space remains between
them owing to the contraction of the cells.

As we advance in life, this contractility takes place with less ease;
youth is the period of its greatest energy; thus in consequence of
great emaciation that takes place in old men, the skin is flaccid and
wrinkled, because the subjacent cellular texture not having contracted,
the cutaneous covering remains at some distance from the external
organs and cannot lie close to them. In a young man, on the contrary,
who has become emaciated, the skin is exactly applied to the organs,
it preserves its tension; because the cells in contracting draw it with
them; these form the external prominences. It is necessary to observe
these prominences; in the face, with the folds of the skin, they form
what are called prominent features.


II. _Vital Properties._

The animal properties are not among the attributes of the cellular
texture in an ordinary state; we can with impunity cut it, draw it in
different directions or distend it with gas. An animal that undergoes
these experiments gives no indication of suffering. If he feels any
pain, it is from the nervous filaments that pass through the texture,
and which may be accidentally irritated. In disease however, the
sensibility is raised to such a point, that it may become the seat of
acute pain; phlegmon is a proof of this.

The organic properties are very distinct in the cellular texture;
fat and serum could not be absorbed there, if they did not make an
impression that brings into action organic sensibility. I would observe
concerning this property considered in the cellular system, that all
substances have not an equal relation to it; among the animal fluids
the blood, the lymph and milk do not raise it so high, when they are
effused or injected there, as to prevent absorption, which takes
place of them as well as of fat and serum. On the other hand this
sensibility is so altered by the contact of urine, bile, saliva or
other fluids destined to be thrown out, that inflammation is often the
consequence, and prevents absorption. Among the foreign fluids injected
water is absorbed. Wine and almost all other irritating fluids excite
suppuration, and are thrown out with the pus that arises from them. We
know that in the operation for hydrocele, abscesses in the scrotum are
always the consequence of an accidental passage of the injection into
the cellular texture. Experiments upon living animals agree perfectly
with this fact; every other irritating fluid, diluted acids, alkaline
solutions, &c. produce the same phenomenon.

Insensible organic contractility is clearly proved in the cellular
texture, by the exhalation and absorption that take place there.

It has to a certain extent sensible organic contractility. We know
that cold alone is sufficient to contract the scrotum in a remarkable
manner; that as it is irritated or not, this part has various degrees
of contraction and relaxation; now it appears to contain under the
skin only cellular texture; the filaments of which, it is true, have
a particular appearance and seem to differ in their nature from the
filaments of the other portions of this system. This contraction to be
sure is not to be compared to that of the muscles, but it is certainly
the first degree of it; it is of the same nature, or rather it is a
medium between this and those oscillations that cannot be described,
which we designate under the name of insensible organic contractility,
and others call tone.


_Sympathies._

The relations of the cellular with the other systems are very numerous
and multiplied; but oftentimes it is not easy to perceive them clearly.
In fact, as it is disseminated in all the organs and contributes to
the structure of all, it is frequently difficult to distinguish what
belongs to it, from that which is an attribute of the parts where
it is found. These relations however, become evident under various
circumstances; in acute as well as chronic diseases, it is very
susceptible of the influence of the affections of the organs. I do not
here mean the alterations arising from juxta-position and continuity,
alterations so common as we have seen, but those produced in parts of
the cellular texture that have not any known relation to the affected
organ.

In acute diseases which have their seat in a particular organ, as in
the lungs, the stomach, the intestines, &c. the cellular texture is
often sympathetically affected; it becomes inflamed, suppurates, &c.
Most critical deposits arise from this real though unknown connexion
between the affected organ and the cellular texture. Oftentimes it is
the natural exhalation or absorption of this texture that is deranged
in acute affections; hence the swelling, and dropsies that sometimes
suddenly arise. I attended a man in the ward Saint Charles who, in
consequence of great terror, had a sudden contraction of the epigastric
region; a tinge of the jaundice, an indication of the affection of the
liver by the emotion of the mind, spread in a few hours after over his
face. In the evening he had great œdema of the lower limbs, an œdema
produced, without doubt, sympathetically by the influence of the liver
upon the cellular texture. This influence of the principal organs upon
this system becomes especially remarkable in chronic affections, in
the alterations of texture they experience. We know that most of the
gradual diseases of the heart, the lungs, the spleen, the stomach, the
liver, the womb, &c. have among their symptoms, in the latter stages, a
dropsy more or less general, which arises from the debility created in
the cellular texture. Medicine owes much to Corvisart, for being among
the first to perceive that almost all infiltrations are symptomatic,
that almost all consequently depend upon an influence produced by the
affected organ upon the cellular texture. That comes on gradually then,
which took place suddenly in the patient I mentioned just now.

We see in all acute diseases, that the skin very easily perceives
the sympathetic influence of diseased organs, that it is many times
alternately dry or moist, oftentimes in the same day. I am convinced
that the cellular texture experiences the same alterations as the skin,
and that if we could see what is going on there, we should perceive
that its cells are more or less moist, or more or less dry, according
to the kind of influence it receives; it is to this also that must
be referred the different state of bodies that have died of acute
diseases, which present innumerable varieties in their cellular serum.

Most physicians consider in too general a manner a number of symptoms,
which, to speak correctly, do not depend as they imagine, upon the
disease, but wholly upon a sympathetic affection produced by the
diseased organ upon the sound ones, which, according as they are
affected, give rise to different phenomena truly foreign to the
disease, that sometimes render it complicated but do not form an
essential part of it; they can take place or not, and the disease
remains the same.

Observe that organic sensibility and contractility are almost always
in action in cellular sympathies, because these are the two vital
forces essentially predominant in that system. Thus sensible organic
contractility and animal contractility are particularly exercised in
muscular sympathies, according as the system of organic muscles, or
that of the muscles of animal life, receive sympathetic excitement.

The cellular system not only receives the influence of other organs
in its sympathies, but it exercises its own upon them. In phlegmon,
which is the inflammatory state of this system, if the tumour is
considerable, different alterations are oftentimes discoverable in
the functions of the brain, the heart, the liver, the stomach, &c.
Sympathetic vomiting, which is called an overflow of bile, delirium,
&c. are phenomena that are seen with large phlegmonous swellings
without belonging to the disease itself. Art avails itself of the
influence of the diseased cellular system upon other organs, in the
introduction of setons. Oftentimes in diseases of the eyes, a seton
produces an effect that cannot be obtained from a blister: why? because
the relation that exists between the cellular texture and the eye, is
more active than that which unites the latter to the integuments.


_Characters of the vital properties._

After what has been said, we see that the vital activity is
sufficiently evident in the cellular system. In this point of view,
it is much superior to other organs that are white like it, and among
which it has been ranked, such as the aponeuroses, the tendons, the
cartilages, the ligaments, &c., organs remarkable for the obscurity
of their vital forces and the dullness of their functions. Thus the
phenomena of inflammation go through their different periods much
quicker in this system. Their progress is very rapid, compared to that
of different tumours that appear in the systems of which I have just
spoken.

Suppuration takes place here with a rapidity of which we have an
example in but few of the organs. Every one knows the fluid that comes
from this suppuration. Its colour, its consistence, all its external
qualities have become the type to which we refer the ideas that we form
of pus; so that that which does not resemble it, is considered to be
pus of a bad kind, or as we say sanious. This opinion is incorrect.
Certainly the pus that flows from a bone, a muscle, the skin in
erisypelas, the mucous membranes in catarrh, is of a good kind so long
as the inflammation is regularly going through its periods; it is
however totally different from cellular pus. As this is most frequently
observed, especially in surgery, we have formed a general idea of
laudable, as of sanious pus. Cutaneous, mucous, osseous pus, &c. have
each their peculiar sanies, which differs among them according to the
vital alterations of the organ, from which it is derived. So that the
pus of each system differs from that of the others, in the same way as
the alterations of which it is susceptible are different from their
purulent alterations.

Has the cellular texture peculiar vital modifications in those organs
to whose structure it contributes? From what has been said above, it
seems hardly probable. All that I have been saying, applies to the
system considered in the interstices of the organs, separate from all
combination with their structure. It is possible however that its vital
activity is diminished in the cartilages, the tendons, &c., that it is
increased a little in the skin, that its life, in general tends to an
equilibrium with that of the parts in which it is found; but these are
conjectures that nothing positive confirms.

That which ought not to escape us here, is the manifest difference
of vitality that exists between the texture of layers and filaments
almost every where spread, and the texture that is wholly filamentous,
which is exterior to the mucous surfaces, to the blood-vessels,
and excretories, a difference from which arises the rareness of
inflammation and tumours in this last. It is often a real barrier that
stops the affections of the first, a barrier that protects the organ
it covers. Thus I have many times observed in opening bodies, that
whilst the ordinary texture, in which the arteries are embedded as in
the axilla, is in a state of suppuration, and almost disorganized by
the pus, that which forms the external covering of the vessels remains
untouched; it has not undergone the least alteration. I have seen the
same phenomenon in the texture exterior to the urethra in deposits of
pus at the loins.


III. _Properties of re-production._

The cellular texture is distinguished from other organs by the
faculty it has of throwing out a kind of vegetation, of elongating
and re-producing itself, of growing when it has been cut or divided
in any manner. It is upon this faculty that depends the formation of
cicatrices, tumours, cysts, &c.


_Influence of the cellular texture upon the formation of cicatrices._

Cicatrices may be considered under two relations, 1st. in the external
organs, in the sub-cutaneous texture and skin particularly; 2d. in the
internal organs. Let us examine them at first in the external.

Every wound that follows the ordinary periods, presents between its
formation and its cicatrization, the following phenomena; 1st. it
inflames; 2d. fleshy granulations are formed upon its surface; 3d.
it suppurates; 4th. it sinks down; 5th. it is covered with a fine
pellicle, red at first and afterwards becoming whitish. Let us trace
these different periods.


_First period._

Inflammation commences the instant the wound is made. This is the
sudden result of the irritation caused by the instrument, the contact
of the air, the dressings and surrounding bodies. Shut out until
then from the contact of the air, most of the parts concerned in the
solution of continuity, enjoy only organic sensibility; but then these
contributing to form the surface of the body, ought to enjoy animal
sensibility, that which transmits to the brain the impressions that
are received. Now the effect of inflammation upon organs endowed only
with the first kind of sensibility, is to raise it so much, that it
ascends to the same degree as the second, and can like it, transmit to
the brain its impressions; so that by it the parts divided by a wound
become capable of performing the functions of the integuments. This
is the first advantage, without doubt, of this inflammatory period of
cicatrization.

Another advantage of this period is to dispose the parts to the
development of fleshy granulations. In fact, inflammation always
precedes this development; now the increase of life that it produces
in the organs, appears to be necessary to animate the parts that are
to be reproduced; by it the cellular texture, where the granulations
are formed, is endowed with more sensibility and more insensible
contractility; it raises it to a temperature above that of the
neighbouring organs; it becomes the centre of a small circulating
system independent of that of the heart. It is in the midst of
this extension of the forces, that the fleshy granulations arise
and increase, for the production of which the natural forces would
have been insufficient. Hence the paleness and flaccidity of these
granulations, when these different functions are weakened or cease.


_Second period._

The production of fleshy granulations succeeds to inflammation. It
presents the following phenomena; small reddish bodies, like tubercles,
arise, unequal and irregularly disposed upon the surface of the wound;
they are not fleshy, as their name, given, no doubt, on account of
their colour, would indicate; they are little cellular vesicles, filled
with a thick substance, like lard, which we are unacquainted with, and
which it is important to analyze. This substance so fills the cells,
that in blowing air into the texture subjacent to a wound, whether in a
living or dead body, this fluid does not enter the granulations; they
are raised up entire, but no one of them is developed or distended as
the cells which this substance does not fill; the granulations remain
the same in the midst of the general bloating. I have often made these
experiments upon animals that I have wounded for the purpose.

In proportion as the granulations are developed upon an exposed
cellular surface, we see them unite together, and form, by their
union, a kind of provisional membrane, which absolutely prevents the
contact of air upon the subjacent organs, while the true cicatrix,
that which is to be permanent, is forming. This provisional membrane
of cicatrices, this kind of epidermis destined to defend the parts
during the work of cicatrization, differs from common serous membranes
in this, that they are smooth and every where uniform, whilst the
granulations produce here an unequal and rough surface. This inequality
of the granulations and their separation, appear to be opposed to what
I have said concerning the first state of cicatrices; the following
experiment leaves no doubt upon the subject. I made a large wound
upon a dog, and let it go through its first periods; the animal was
then killed. I removed a portion of flesh upon which the granulations
were developed; I distended it by a prominent body, placed on the
side opposite to the granulations, so as to make the granulated
surface convex, that had been concave; the tubercles were effaced; the
provisional pellicle, stretched out, became very evident; it might have
been taken for an inflamed serous membrane.

It follows hence, that when the granulations are united together, that
the air is entirely excluded, and that what is commonly said of the
contact of this fluid is inaccurate and contrary to the arrangements
of nature, which knows how better than we can do by our dressings, to
cover over a divided part, whilst the work of cicatrization is prepared
and effected.

These are the general phenomena that cutaneous cicatrices offer in
the two first periods of their formation. The internal cicatrices
show nearly the same thing. Now it is easy to prove that the cellular
system here performs not only an important but an exclusive part, and
that all these phenomena take place in its texture or its cells. The
following observations prove in a satisfactory manner the cellular
nature of the granulations and the provisional pellicle that arises
from them. 1st. Where the cellular system is most abundant, as in the
cheeks, granulations grow most easily and wounds are soonest healed.
2d. The skin, stripped too much of the cellular texture, is not
covered with ease with these productions, and adheres with difficulty
to the neighbouring parts; hence the precept so strongly inculcated
in surgery, of saving this texture in dissecting out tumours, in the
extirpation of wens, cysts, &c. 3d. Maceration always reduces to
this first base the surfaces of granulating wounds, when we expose a
dead body that has one to this simple experiment. 4th. The nature of
fleshy granulations is the same every where, whatever be the organ
that produces them, whether a muscle, a cartilage, the skin, a bone, a
ligament, &c.; only they are more or less backward, according as the
life of each organ is more or less active, more or less decided, and
the vital forces found there marked in a greater or less degree; thus
they appear at the end of four or five days upon the skin, and it is
very much longer before they are visible upon the bones; but their
structure, their external appearance, their nature, are always the
same; then they are only the expansion, the enlargement of an organ,
that is met with in all the others; now this organ common to all, this
general base of every organized part, is the cellular texture.

From the red colour of fleshy granulations, it has been thought that
they were a vascular expansion; but their development is unlike every
production of the blood-vessels. On the one hand we have seen, that
the cellular texture contains so many exhalants and absorbents, that
it seems to be almost made up of them; on the other hand, we shall see
that in inflammation a passage is constantly given to red blood in this
kind of vessels; then, as the fleshy granulations are cellular, they
consequently partake of the nature of this system; and when found in
a real inflammatory state, we conceive that their redness is the same
as that of an inflamed pleura, of the cellular texture that has become
the seat of phlegmon, of erisypelatous skin, &c.; a redness that does
not imply an elongation of blood vessels, but only the passage of red
blood, in those that usually carry white. This is so true, that when
the inflammation is gone, the blood ceasing to enter these vessels, the
membrane takes its natural colour; so that the granulations, after the
formation of the cicatrix that arises from their near approach to each
other, whiten because the blood no longer enters them. Now if it had
been a new production of vessels, they would continue and perform their
functions. Moreover, how can we suppose a development of blood-vessels
where they did not primarily exist, as in the tendons, the cartilages,
&c. which have, like other organs, fleshy granulations in their
solutions of continuity?

Let us conclude from these circumstances, that the arterial system
is not connected with the formation of fleshy granulations; that the
cellular system is alone concerned in it, because that this alone is
endowed with the faculty of increasing, extending, and reproducing
itself.

This is what takes place in the second period of the cicatrization of
wounds; the cellular texture, by the increase of power that it acquired
in the first period, is raised into vesicles irregularly disposed,
which exhale a white substance, that is not well understood, and unite
at their superficies and form a provisional membrane. But how is this
membrane changed into that of the cicatrix? Observe nature, and you
will see that it brings on suppuration and a sinking down of the parts,
before the arrival of this period.


_Third period._

The period of suppuration does not take place in the cicatrization of
the bones, in that of broken cartilages, of torn muscles and generally
in the reunion of all divided organs without external wounds. We must
then show what relation there is between their cicatrices and those
of the external organs; for a common principle presides over all the
operations of nature, though they may have a different appearance.

When a bone is broken, the two first periods of its reunion are the
same as those of the external organs; the ends inflame, and then
are covered with cellular granulations. In the third period, these
granulations, having first united together, become a kind of secretory
or rather exhalant organ, which separates first the gelatine which
encrusts it, and gives to the callus a cartilaginous nature, and then
the phosphate of lime which completes the osseous arrangement. In the
cicatrization of cartilages, gelatine only is exhaled; in that of the
divided muscles, fibrin, &c.; in a word the cellular texture is the
common base of all the cicatrices of the internal organs, then the
fleshy granulations are the same for all; they resemble each other
in each having the same base; that which establishes the difference
between them, is the substance that is separated, and which remains
in the cellular texture. This substance is generally the same as that
which serves for the nutrition of the organ, and which is by this
function, constantly carried there and brought away. Now as each organ
of the different systems has its peculiar nutritive substance, each has
its peculiar mode of reunion; we should understand the cicatrization of
the different organs, as well as that of the bones, if the substances
that nourish these organs were as well known as gelatine and phosphate
of lime. The mode of development of the internal cicatrices is in
general analogous to that of nutrition, or rather it is the same with
this difference only, that the cellular texture rising into irregular
granulations upon the divided surfaces, does not afford to the cicatrix
a base formed upon the shape of the organ; hence the inequality of
callus, &c.

This then is what in general takes place in the third period of the
cicatrization of the internal organs: phenomena very analogous are
seen in that of the external. The membrane which covers the fleshy
granulations thus becomes a kind of exhalant organ which separates
from the blood a whitish fluid that is called pus. But there is
this difference, that instead of remaining in the texture of the
granulations, of penetrating and encrusting it, as the phosphate of
lime and gelatine penetrate the bone, it is thrown out and has nothing
to do with the reunion; so that in internal cicatrization there
is exhalation, then incrustation of the exhaled fluid, and in the
external, there is exhalation and then excretion of this fluid.

Besides, an internal wound which affects the cellular texture and
suppurates, appears to me to resemble perfectly serous surfaces, which
are covered in consequence of their inflammation with a purulent
exudation. The fine pellicle that covers the granulations is of the
same nature as an inflamed pleura or peritoneum, that is, it is
essentially cellular. The pus is in both cases almost of the same
nature, and analogous to that of phlegmon, because it comes from
similar organs, whilst if the skin alone is concerned, this fluid is of
a very different nature, as we see in erisypelas.

The exhalation of pus upon a cicatrizing surface and serous membranes,
appears to me to have a great analogy with the whitish substance of
some kinds of cysts.


_Fourth period._

Suppuration gradually exhausts the whitish substance that fills the
granulations; then their cells, which were at first swelled, insensibly
diminish in size, they close by their contractility of texture; by
degrees they adhere to each other, and from their adherence arise the
following phenomena. 1st. All the fleshy tubercles disappear and there
is a uniform surface in their place. 2d. This surface is a very fine
membrane, because the thickness of the granulations arose not from the
cells, but the substance they contained, and which being taken away,
leaves them empty. 3d. This membrane has infinitely less width than
the pellicle that first covered the granulations, because the cells in
contracting, draw the edges of the cicatrix from the circumference to
the centre; these approximate, and the breadth of the wound diminishes;
the same granulations that in the beginning occupied a space of half a
foot diameter, as for example in the operation for cancer, are often
contracted to an inch or two.

When the adhesion is complete between all the cells that first form
the fleshy granulations, the membrane of the cicatrix, the result of
this adhesion, exists. Thus it is that all the flesh, the development
of which astonishes us, and which amply repairs the loss of substance,
is but a pellicle, reddish when the exhalants are full of blood, but
afterwards white by the return of this blood into its vessels.

From this mode of origin of external cicatrices, it is easy to
conceive, 1st. why they adhere intimately to the places in which they
are found, and have no laxity in the integuments; 2d. why the skin
approximates from all the neighbouring parts to cover the wound; 3d.
why it wrinkles in approximating; 4th. why, where it yields the most,
the cicatrix is the smallest, as in the scrotum, the axilla, &c.; and
why on the contrary it is the largest, where it yields but little,
as on the sternum, the cranium, the great trochanter, &c.; 5th. why
the thickness of all cicatrices is uniformly in an inverse ratio to
their width; in fact as there is only the same quantity of cellular
granulations to form them, it is necessary that they should lose in
one way what they gain in another; hence those that are broad are
much more easily torn; 6th. why they have not a regular organization,
do not partake of the functions of the cutaneous organ they replace,
and why their texture is absolutely different from this organ. The
cicatrization of wounds left to themselves, especially those with
loss of substance, differs essentially from the union by the first
intention, which is effected by the agglutination of the edges. In this
last there is neither the second period, that of fleshy granulations,
nor the third, that of suppuration, nor the fourth, that of sinking
down. Union succeeds immediately to the first, that of inflammation.

We see, from all that has been said, that the cellular texture is the
essential agent in the production of all cicatrices, that it forms
their basis and their principle, that without it they could not take
place, and that they depend especially upon the property it has of
extending and increasing.


_Influence of the cellular texture in the formation of tumours._

In the formation of cicatrices, the cellular texture grows but a few
lines above the level of the place of division; the cells it forms in
its reproduction are generally small. It is not so when there is a
departure from the ordinary laws of cicatrization, when any accidental
cause alters the vital properties; then we see a very extensive growth,
which often has more of this texture than the parts from which it
arises. All those different excresences, known by the names of fungous
flesh, fleshy protuberances, soft flesh, &c. are but the result of this
increase of the cellular system, being greater than what it should be
by the ordinary laws of cicatrization; thus the cicatrices are not
effected while these irregular productions continue; it is not until
they are repressed that consolidation takes place. But it is especially
in different tumours that we see this development, this remarkable
growth of cellular texture. All the fungi, and productions that are
developed exclusively in the mucous membranes, in the sinuses, the
nasal cavities, the mouth and the womb particularly, and which differ
essentially from those that have their seat on the fibrous membranes,
the dura-mater for example, though they are compounded under a common
name, all the fungi, I say, arise from the cellular texture, they are
of a peculiar substance deposited there, which as it is more or less
abundantly separated, leaves its primitive base more or less exposed.

Polypi, whether mucous or sarcomatous, tumours that are equally the
attribute of the mucous system, have also the cellular texture for
the primitive base of their organization. All the different kinds of
cancers exhibit it in a manner more or less evident, in the swelling of
the parts which they occasion. It would be necessary to notice almost
all tumours, to point out those that the cellular texture assists to
form.

We may then consider it as forming the general base, the nutritive
parenchyma of almost all excrescences. It shoots up, and grows first
at the part where the tumour is to be developed; then it is encrusted
with different foreign substances, and their difference constitutes
the difference of the tumours. These phenomena are precisely analogous
to those of ordinary nutrition. In fact, all the organs resemble each
other in their nutritive base, the parenchyma of nutrition, which
is vascular and cellular; they differ in the nutritive substances
deposited in this parenchyma. All tumours then are cellular, this
is their common character. Their peculiar character is derived from
the substances that the texture separates, according as the morbid
alterations of which it is the seat, modify differently its vital
forces and place it in relation with this or that substance; thus as we
have said, all the internal cicatrices are similar in the first period,
in that of fleshy granulations, and differ as the nutritive substance
of the organ to which they belong, penetrates them.

Thus we see, that nature is the same in her operations, that a
uniform law presides over all, and the only difference arises from
the application of this law. Wherever there is natural nutrition or
an accidental modification of this function, the cellular texture
performs an essential part; now this important part which it has in
cicatrization and the formation of tumours, arises from the singular
property it possesses of extending itself, of dilating and growing.
Examine the tumours that appear in the muscles, the tendons, the
cartilages, &c. you will not see there an expansion of fleshy, or
tendinous fibres, or of the cartilaginous substance, &c. the cellular
texture alone goes from the organ and is spread in the tumour; thus
the fibres of the bones, the muscles, the fibrous substances divided
in solutions of continuity, are not raised above the level of the
wound, as the cellular texture of the part is for the production of
granulations.

The tumours of which I have spoken, have nothing in common, as has
been imagined, with the acute swellings that constitute phlegmon,
nor with that engorgement that the limbs experience where there is a
violent irritation, as a compound fracture or luxation, a whitlow, a
puncture with a poisoned weapon, &c. an engorgement that is generally
seen around the whole external parts, which are violently affected;
it sometimes comes on almost instantaneously, and is not really
inflammatory, though there is tension, pain, &c.; it deserves rather
the name of inflation than engorgement.

We must not confound these tumours with certain chronic swellings,
in which, without increasing or growing, the cellular texture is
infiltrated, and different substances enter it, that change its nature;
such are those that take place in the diseases of the articulations;
such is the callosity of fistulas, &c.; the fatty matter that is found
in some tumours, &c. In all these cases there is neither growth or
enlargement, as in a polypus, a fungus, &c.; it is a substance more
solid than serum, that infiltrates the cellular texture, obliterates
its layers, and presents a homogeneous appearance.

There is after death a great difference between an acute and chronic
tumour, between that produced by growth and that by infiltration.
In fact, one remains the same, and preserves, until putrefaction,
its size, its form, and its density, like all the organs. The other
sinks away, as I have remarked, by the loss of the vital forces. This
subsidence varies; if the tumour is nothing but the cellular inflation
of which I have spoken, and which is so common in external injuries,
it entirely disappears; if, besides this inflation, there is an
accumulation of blood, as in carbuncle, phlegmon, &c. a portion of the
tumour remains, though always much diminished in size. It is generally
in this inflation, of the immediate cause of which I am ignorant, that
the subsidence especially takes place. Let us pass to a function of the
cellular texture not less important, and which is very analogous to
this.


_Influence of the cellular texture in the formation of cysts._

A cyst is a membrane, in the form of a sac without an opening, which
is accidentally developed, and which, containing fluids of a different
nature, has been on this account divided into many species. The cysts
are formed from the cellular texture; they arise in its cells, grow in
the midst of them, and have all its characteristics.

To be convinced of the influence of the cellular system in the
formation of cysts, it is sufficient to prove that between them and the
serous membranes, there is the greatest analogy, and almost identity;
for we shall see that these membranes are essentially cellular. The
following are some of the analogies of these two kinds of productions,
the one of which is natural and the other accidental.

1. Analogy of conformation. The cysts form all kinds of sacs without an
opening, containing a fluid that is exhaled from them, having a smooth,
polished surface contiguous to this fluid, an uneven, loose one,
continuous with the neighbouring cellular texture.

2. Analogy of structure. Always formed of a single layer, like serous
membranes, cysts have like them a cellular texture, as is proved
by maceration and inflation. Thus they constantly arise in the
midst of the cellular organ, usually where it is most abundant. Few
blood-vessels enter them; the exhalant system is conspicuous there.

3. Analogy of the vital properties. There is no animal sensibility in
them in an ordinary state, but it is very evident in inflammation;
organic sensibility is always remarkable in them, and tone, which is
characterized by a slow and gradual contraction, in consequence of the
artificial or natural evacuation of the contained fluids, &c.; these
are the characters of cysts, they are also, as we have seen, those of
serous membranes.

4. Analogy of functions. Cysts are evidently secretory or rather
exhalant organs, which exhale the fluid they contain. Exhalation
becomes very evident there, when after the evacuation of the fluids,
the membranous sac has not been removed, or an artificial inflammation
excited in it. Absorption is proved, in the spontaneous cure of
encysted dropsies, a cure which must depend on this function alone.

5. Analogy of affections. Who does not know that between the dropsy of
the tunica vaginalis and the encysted dropsy of the cord, there is the
greatest analogy; that the curative means are the same, that in both
cases the inflammation that is produced by the injection of a foreign
fluid, wine, for example, is the same, and that the cure is effected
by a similar mechanism? Whoever has opened two bodies, each having
one of these affections, and examined the sacs in which the fluid is
contained, must have perceived that their appearance is precisely the
same. Remove the fluid from the cyst of a soft wen, and you will
discover but little difference between it, dropsical cysts, and serous
membranes.

The preceding considerations induce us to admit a perfect resemblance
between cysts and serous membranes, of whose characters they partake,
and into the system of which they essentially enter, and consequently
into the cellular system. It is very probable that there is a relation
between them, and that when a cyst is formed and exhales copiously,
the exhalation of the serous membranes is diminished; this does not,
however, rest upon direct proof. There is this essential question,
how are these cysts developed? How a membrane, which does not
exist in a natural state, can arise, grow, and even acquire a very
considerable development under certain circumstances. This problem
is usually resolved in the following manner; at first, it is said,
a small quantity of fluid collects in a cell; this fluid increases
and dilates in every direction, the parietes of the cell, which are
attached to the neighbouring cells and thus increased in thickness.
Gradually this fluid, serous in dropsy, white and thick in steatoma,
&c. increases in quantity, presses in every direction the sac that
contains it, enlarges, crowds against the neighbouring organs, and
thus acquires the form under which we see it. Nothing at first sight
appears more simple than this mechanical explanation; nothing is less
conformable to the process of nature. The following considerations
will serve to prove this. 1st. The cysts are analogous in every point
of view to serous membranes; how then could they have a different
origin from these membranes, which are never formed, as we shall see,
by the compression of the cellular texture? 2d. Does an origin thus
mechanical, in which the vessels compressed against each other would
inevitably be obliterated, as we see the skin become callous, accord
with the exhaling and absorbing function of the cysts and with their
peculiar kind of inflammation? 3d. Why, if the cells adhering to each
other, form these unnatural sacs, is not the neighbouring cellular
texture diminished and destroyed, even when they acquire great size?
4th. If, on the one hand, the cysts are formed by the compression of
the cellular texture, and if it is true on the other, as we cannot
doubt, that their fluid is exhaled by them, it is necessary to conclude
then, that this fluid pre-exists in the organ that separates it from
the blood: I would as soon assert that the saliva pre-existed in the
parotid, &c.

The immediate consequence of the preceding reflections, I think, is,
that the common explanation of the formation of cysts, is directly
opposite to the general course that nature pursues in her operations.
How, then, do these sacs arise and grow? these tumours that appear
externally, or are developed within; for there is no difference in
these two sorts of unnatural productions, except in the form. Most
tumours throw from their external surface the fluid that is separated
there. A cyst, on the contrary, exhales this fluid by its internal
surface, and preserves it in its cavity. Suppose a fungous, suppurating
tumour, suddenly becomes a cavity, and suppuration is carried from the
external surface to the walls of this cavity; this will be a cyst.
On the other hand, suppose a superficial cyst, the cavity of which
is obliterated, and the fluid of which is exhaled upon the external
surface; this will be then a suppurating tumour.

As the form, then, establishes the only difference between tumours and
cysts, why should not the formation of one be analogous to that of
the other? Surely, no one ever thought of attributing to compression,
the formation of external or internal tumours. We may conceive of the
production of cysts in the following way; they begin to be developed
and grow in the midst of the cellular organ, by laws very analogous
to those of the general increase of our organs, and which seem to be
aberrations, and unnatural applications of these fundamental laws, of
which we are ignorant. When the cyst is once characterized, exhalation
commences; at first scanty, it afterwards increases as the cyst
grows. The increase of the exhalant organ, then, always precedes the
accumulation of the exhaled fluid, so that other things being equal,
the quantity of suppuration in a tumour is in a direct ratio to its
size.


ARTICLE SIXTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE CELLULAR TEXTURE.


I. _State of the cellular system in the first age._

In the first periods after conception, the fœtus is only a mucous mass,
homogeneous in appearance, and in which the cellular texture seems
almost exclusively to predominate. In fact, when the organs begin to
be developed in this mass, the spaces that are left between them are
filled with a substance which, exactly similar to that which before
formed the whole of the body, can be considered as the residue of it,
or rather perhaps it exists in a distinct manner, because it has not
been penetrated with the peculiar nutritive substance, like that which
forms the parenchyma of nutrition of the organs, which before this
penetration resembled it precisely. This substance that lies between
the organs, and which is the principle of the cellular texture, is the
farther removed from a fluid state, as the period of labour approaches.
First it is a true mucus, then a kind of glue, then the cellular
texture begins to appear.

This primitive state of the cellular organ, this appearance that it has
at first, is owing to the great quantity of fluids that enter it at
that period; it does not denote an inorganic existence; we can then
compare it to the vitreous humour, which appears wholly fluid at first
sight, because the transparency of its layers do not permit us to see
them in the humour that enters its cells; make a puncture so as to
evacuate this humour, and they become evident.

Thus the cellular texture, extremely fine and even transparent in the
first periods of life, is then concealed by the humour that fills it,
and becomes more sensible as this humour diminishes with age. This
phenomenon sometimes takes place in after life, in different serous
infiltrations, those especially in which the infiltrated fluid has some
viscidity.

What is this humour that is so abundant in the cellular system, in
the first months after conception? Is it albuminous like that which
afterwards lubricates it? Probably it is; I should think, also, that it
has much of the character of gelatine, a character which predominates,
we know, in the animal humours at this period; I know of no experiment
upon this point. Whatever the humour is, it is much more viscid and
unctuous than it is afterwards; the touch is sufficient to convince us
of this. It is its predominance, joined to the delicacy of the cellular
layers, that, in the first months, makes every attempt to render the
fœtus emphysematous, by blowing air under the skin, almost absolutely
useless.

At birth and some time after, the great quantity of sub-cutaneous fat
makes artificial emphysema very difficult; it does not appear that the
fœtus ever has a natural one. The delicacy of the cellular layers and
filaments is such at this period, that the imagination cannot represent
it; the texture of the hair is gross in comparison with it. I presume
that the ball of fat, which I have said almost always exists in the
cheek of the fœtus, arises from a rupture of several layers, a rupture
from which is produced a great cell, that is filled with fat.

Sometime before birth, at that period and in the subsequent years,
the cellular humour constantly diminishes; the cells become dryer,
consequently more apparent; the whole mass of the cellular system
diminishes, because as the organs increase, the interstices are
contracted. This system however predominates for a long time over the
others; hence the roundness of form that characterizes the infant, the
want of prominence of its organs, that are almost concealed by it;
hence in part the suppleness and multiplicity of its movements; hence
also the frequent diseases of which it is the seat at that age.

The layers still preserve an extreme delicacy; they are still easily
broken. In producing emphysema, upon very lean children, I have
observed that often it forms in places very considerable dilatations,
a kind of sacs in which the air accumulates in large quantity, and
which arises from this rupture; whilst in the same experiment upon
an adult, the air is propagated in an uniform manner and constantly
infiltrates the cells without destroying them. By comparing in our
slaughter-houses, the flesh of calves blown, and that of oxen in the
same state, I have sometimes made an analogous observation.

In infancy and in youth, the vital energy of the cellular texture is
very conspicuous; at this age, the fleshy granulations, essentially
cellular as we have seen, arise more promptly and go through their
periods more rapidly than at any other age; the union of wounds is
easier; and all tumours, have in their development and their progress,
a rapidity that particularly depends upon the high degree to which the
vital forces of the cellular system are raised at this period. It is
to the same cause, that must be referred the facility of absorption of
serous fluid, which sometimes infiltrates accidentally the cells, as we
see in the scrotum, the eye-lids, &c.; the suddenness of the formation
of cysts, &c.; then dropsies are much less frequent. When they do take
place, why are the superior extremities almost as often affected as
the inferior, whilst the leucophlegmasia of adults commences almost
always in the last? This is then as remarkable a phenomenon, as the
singular tendency that there is in the legs of being infiltrated,
compared with the arms. Does not this depend upon situation, which,
forcing the lymph to ascend against its weight, gradually weakens the
absorbents when it has continued for some time? This explains, why
varices are, as we know, more frequent in the inferior than superior
extremities.


II. _State of the cellular system in the after ages._

In the adult, the cellular texture is condensed and becomes firmer;
its layers have a more compact texture. It appears also to lessen
in quantity, because as the organs increase in thickness, their
interstices are contracted. If there is not a real diminution, there
is at least one in comparison with the state of the organs. It is to
this circumstance that must be attributed in part, their prominence
under the integuments, the striking appearance of the form of the
muscles, &c. It appears besides, that the quantity of cellular texture
varies according to temperaments; that in those called phlegmatic or
lymphatic, it predominates over the other systems, and in the bilious,
which is characterized by a dryness and rigidity of fibre, it is in the
smallest proportion. In women, it is in larger quantity than in men;
the roundness of their forms is in part the result of this.

The motion of a part appears to have no effect in producing a more
active nutrition of its cellular texture, as takes place in the
muscles, the nerves, and sometimes even in the blood-vessels.

In old age this texture is condensed and contracted; it acquires
consistence and hardness. The teeth tear it with difficulty in the
boiled flesh of old animals; like it, it is tough and requires long
boiling to soften it. Much less fluid is exhaled there, hence a sort
of dryness and rigidity, that render the motions of old age difficult.
A kind of withering, that it experiences, contributes essentially to
the general diminution that the body then undergoes. It loses its
vital forces; hence its laxity, that prevents it from supporting the
skin as usual. This becomes every where loose, dependent even in some
places, in which it forms folds. The scrotum has no longer the power
of contracting that characterized it and which it derived from the
forces of the cellular system. This general relaxation, this sort of
flaccidity is the constant attendant of old age, in individuals even
in whom excess of all kinds, or a primitive disposition, have rendered
this age premature. I saw at the Medical Society a dwarf, sixteen years
of age, hardly two feet high, who had already begun to grow old; his
sub-cutaneous texture had that laxity, that does not belong to his age.
The premature decrepitude of the dwarf of the king of Poland, exhibited
the same phenomenon. Two persons who lived a long time with him
informed me, that at his death, there was externally this relaxation
and flaccidity of integuments, of which the subjacent cellular texture
appears to be the seat.

It is rare in old age to find osseous incrustations in the cellular
texture. In the great number of old persons that I have had occasion
to dissect, or to have dissected, I remember to have seen but one,
and that occupied the posterior part of the mesentery. I have seen
some others in adults, especially in women, in whom they are found
frequently, in the cellular texture that separates the womb from the
rectum; I have preserved several specimens of these.




NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


All anatomists have heretofore considered the nervous system in
an uniform manner; but if we reflect a little upon the forms, the
distribution, the texture, the properties and the uses of the different
branches that compose it, it is easy to see that they should be
referred to two general systems, essentially distinct from each other,
the one having the brain and its dependancies for its principal centre,
and the other, having the ganglions. The first belongs especially to
animal life; it is on the one hand the agent, that transmits to the
brain the external impressions that are to produce sensations; and on
the other it serves as a conductor of the volitions of this organ,
which are executed by the voluntary muscles to which it goes. The
second, almost every where distributed to the organs of digestion,
of circulation, of respiration, of the secretions, belongs more
particularly to organic life, in which it performs a part much more
obscure than that of the preceding one. Neither is strictly confined to
the organs of either life. Thus the cerebral nerves send some branches
to the glands, to the involuntary muscles, &c.; and the nervous system
of the ganglions have ramifications in the voluntary muscles. It is
from the general arrangement, without regard to particular exceptions,
that the division of the two nervous systems is founded, between which
I shall not draw a parallel here to show their difference, because the
description of each will be sufficient to do this.

The nervous system of animal life is exactly symmetrical, like all the
organs of that life. The brain and spinal marrow, which are the double
origin of this system, have this character in a remarkable degree.
Nerves precisely similar go from them; hence the name of pair, by
which is designated the double, corresponding trunk, a name, that we
should not be able to employ commonly in the system of ganglions. There
are then really two nervous systems of animal life, the one right,
the other left; the median line separates them. Their distinction is
apparent not only from dissection, but from their diseases. At one
time exactly one half of the body is deprived of motion, and the whole
nervous system of that side remains passive, the other retaining its
ordinary activity; at another, one side only has an unnatural energy
and becomes the seat of convulsions, while the other remains calm. In
both cases, sometimes the phenomenon is general; often it is limited
to a greater or less number of lateral organs; but always there is an
evident separation between the two nervous systems, the right and left.
The kind of partial paralysis, of which I just spoke, and the principal
character of which arises from the symmetry of the nervous system of
animal life, is wholly different, as it regards this character, from
that in which the lower parts of the body are deprived of motion in
consequence of a fall upon the sacrum, or any other analogous cause.

The relations of size of the nervous system with the brain are in man
and most quadrupeds, in an inverse proportion, as has been observed
by Soemmering. In man the brain is much more voluminous than in
the others, who have nerves larger than his. It is easy to prove
this assertion, in all the animals that we commonly employ for our
experiments; in fact, small dogs are used, on account of the size
of their nerves in very delicate experiments upon sensibility. This
difference is a striking proof of the superiority of man, as it
respects the intellectual phenomena, which are all referable to the
encephalic mass. On the other hand, many animals are superior to him
as it respects motions and the four senses of taste, of smell, of
hearing and seeing. Observe however that he surpasses them all in the
perfection of the fifth sense, viz. that of touch. Why? Because this
sense is entirely different from the others, is consequent to them, and
corrects their errors. We touch, because we have seen, heard, tasted
and smelt. This sense is voluntary; it supposes reflection in the
animal that exercises it, the others do not. Light, sounds, &c. strike
the respective organs without any effort of the animal; but he touches
nothing without a preliminary act of the intellectual functions. It
is not then astonishing, that the perfection of the organs of touch
and the great development of the brain, should be in man, in the same
proportion, and that in those animals, in whom the brain is more
contracted, the touch should be more obtuse and the organs less perfect.


ARTICLE FIRST.

EXTERNAL FORMS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

I shall consider these forms, 1st. in the origin; 2d. in the course;
3d. in the termination of the cerebral nerves.


I. _Origin of the cerebral nerves._

The word origin should only be understood in relation to anatomical
arrangement. In fact, the nerves are formed at the same time as the
brain; they are rather organs of communication with this viscus, than
elongations of it. If we take a view of the functions of one part of
the nervous system, we shall see that the termination is at the brain,
and the origin is upon the surface. Is it not said that the nerves
go towards this or that part, that the arteries take this course,
wind about, &c.? These are only metaphorical expressions, the least
reflection will determine their meaning.

The nerves of animal life derive their origin from three principal
portions of the encephalic mass; 1st. from the cerebrum; 2d. from the
Tuber Annulare or Pons Varolii and its elongations; 3d. from the spinal
marrow; the cerebellum gives origin to none. This circumstance, which,
we ought not to lose sight of in the examination of the functions of
each part of the brain, and which will perhaps hereafter elucidate
these functions, is undoubtedly sufficient to make us appreciate
the opinion of many physicians of the last age, which placed in the
cerebellum the source of involuntary motions, and attributed the
voluntary to the cerebrum.

The cerebrum furnishes but two nerves, the olfactory and optic; these
are remarkable, 1st. in this, that their adhesion is very strong at
their origin with the brain, and that by raising the pia mater, we
cannot remove them; 2d. in this, that their softness is greater than
that of most other nerves.

The tuber annulare and its elongations, as well those that go to the
cerebrum and the cerebellum, as that which begins the spinal marrow,
furnish the motores communes of the muscles of the eye, the pathetic,
the origin of which, though posterior, is evidently derived from the
tuber annulare, the trigemini, the motores externi of the eye, the
facial, the auditory, the par vagum, the glosso-pharyngeal and the
great hypo-glossal. All these nerves are distinguished by different
characteristics. 1st. As the medullary substance is every where
exterior to the eminences from which they arise, all appear manifestly
to be continuous with this substance. 2d. Almost all begin by many
filaments separated from each other; sometimes, as in the trigemini
and par vagum, these are very numerous. The others arise, some by
one filament and others by two. 3d. Except the auditory nerve, all
have a greater consistence at their origin than these last. 4th. They
adhere but little to the corresponding cerebral portion, so that they
are almost always raised in detaching the pia mater; thus it requires
great precaution, to prevent breaking the nerves from the brain when it
is taken out of the skull. The adhesion of the pathetic, the motores
communes and the facial, is particularly weak. We should almost say,
from a slight examination, that there was only contiguity.

The spinal marrow gives origin to thirty or thirty-one pair of nerves,
viz. eight cervical, twelve dorsal, five lumbar, five or six sacral,
and to a nerve that enters the cranium and goes out of it under the
name of spinal. The following are the characters of these nerves at
their origin. 1st. They are continuous, like the preceding, with the
medullary substance. 2d. They all arise by two cords, one anterior, the
other posterior. These cords derive their origin from many filaments,
placed above each other, most usually separate and always distinct.
3d. The adhesion is much stronger at the origin of these nerves than
at that of the preceding, a circumstance that depends upon a cause
that will be hereafter pointed out. 4th. The consistence of the spinal
nerves is also very evident in their canals.

From what has been said, it is clear, that the nerves do not arise deep
in the cerebral substance, at least in an apparent manner, but take
their origin from its external surface. Many physiologists however,
have admitted an origin more remote than can be proved by examination.
They have believed that the nerves of one side arise from the opposite,
and that each pair cross each other not only in the brain, but also in
the spinal marrow. This opinion is founded upon a singular phenomenon,
viz. this, that paralysis almost always takes place on that side which
is opposite to the affected side of the brain, a phenomenon that is
frequently noticed in diseases and proved also by experiments, as has
been shown by Lorry. On the other hand, it is said that convulsions
are seated in the side corresponding with the injured side of the
brain; but this fact is more uncertain than that of paralysis, which
is incontestable. I do not believe that with our present knowledge we
can explain this last, and the anatomical opinion pointed out above, is
contradicted at the first sight.

I will make but one observation upon this singular phenomenon, and that
is, that it particularly concerns the nerves of motion, and hardly ever
affects the nerves of sensation. In fact we know, that in wounds of the
head, in consequence of apoplexy, &c. one eye, one ear, one side of the
tongue, one nostril, do not become insensible, as the muscles of one
side cease to move. We do not suddenly become paralytic on one side as
it regards sensation, as we do as it respects motion in hemiplegia.
Experiments cannot elucidate this, for it is impossible to perceive
the alterations of sensibility as we do those of mobility. However, by
compressing the brain of a dog, and thus rendering him paralytic on one
side, and then shutting each eye separately and alternately, to see if
he distinguished objects, and afterwards by presenting in turn to each
nostril volatile ammonia, or other pungent substances, I have not seen,
as it regarded the sensibility, an alteration corresponding with that
which the mobility experienced. We often observe in man a discordance
in the organs of sense. One ear hears better than the other, one eye
sees further, &c.; hence false hearing, hence a species of strabismus,
&c.; but the cause of these discordances appears to reside in the organ
itself, and not to be connected with the brain.

Moreover, it does not appear that each hemisphere always corresponds
necessarily with the nerves of motion of the opposite side. In fact,
we often see on the right side effusions or injuries of the cerebral
substance, without any alterations of motion on the left, and vice
versa.

The following are the cerebral membranes that are found at the origin
of the nerves; 1st. the dura mater forms for them a kind of canal in
the fissure through which they go out, then it quits them entirely, and
is partly lost in the cellular texture, and the remainder is reflected
upon the edges of the opening and continued with the periosteum. The
optic nerve is the only exception to this; it is accompanied in its
whole course by a fibrous canal, which goes even to the sclerotic coat,
which in this way, communicates with the dura mater. 2d. The tunica
arachnoides surrounds every nerve at its origin with a fold formed
oftentimes in the shape of a tunnel, the broadest part of which is at
the origin. By carefully raising the brain, or by opening the dura
mater of the spinal canal, we very easily discover this fold, which is
continued to the osseous opening, through which the dura mater enters,
it is then reflected upon the surface of this membrane corresponding
with the brain, forming a sac between it and the nerve. Sometimes, as
in the optic nerve and the motor externus, it penetrates the fibrous
canal of the dura mater, and accompanies the nerve to the middle of the
canal, which, consequently, is lined in part by the tunica arachnoides,
and partly by the cellular texture. 3d. The pia mater is used in a
manner that is difficult to understand, and which has not as yet been
well explained. I shall speak of its continuity upon the nerves, in
treating of their peculiar membrane.

The nerves go over a more or less considerable extent before going
out of the cranium or the spinal canal. 1st. The two that arise from
the cerebrum are much longer within than without. 2d. Among those of
the tuber annulare and its dependancies, the pathetic nerves are the
only ones that remain any length of time in the cranium before they
go out of it, and that have a greater extent there than externally;
all the others go out almost immediately. 3d. The nerves of the spine
have a much greater extent when examined lower down. Above, they become
directly external; below, they are six inches long in the canal, and
consequently pass many foramina before they arrive at their own;
hence it happens, as has been observed by Jadelot, that if we avail
ourselves of the spinous processes, on account of their prominence, to
judge of the origin of the nerves in the application of the moxa, it
is necessary, in the neck, in order to act upon a point corresponding
with the origin of any nerve in particular, to take nearly the spinous
process of the vertebra that corresponds numerically with the pair that
we have in view, whilst in the loins it is much above this vertebra
that the application should be made.

The direction of nerves at their origin is also very variable. At the
cerebrum and the tuber annulare, there is no general arrangement. But
in the spinal nerves, this direction, almost perpendicular to the
marrow above the cervical region, always becomes more and more oblique
down to the end of the lumbar region. These three things, viz. the
length in the canal, the size and oblique direction of the spinal
nerves, successively increase from above downwards in a gradual manner,
with some exceptions as to size.

Each pair of nerves, in going from the cerebrum, the tuber annulare or
its dependancies, and the spinal marrow, diverges in the two trunks
which form the pair. The olfactories alone converge, and the spinal run
nearly parallel.


II. _Course of the cerebral nerves._

The nerves exhibit different arrangements at their exit from the
osseous cavities that contain their origin.


_Communication of the cerebral nerves at their exit from their osseous
cavities._

1st. The two nerves of the cerebrum, go without communicating with
any other, to their respective destination. 2d. Those of the tuber
annulare and its dependancies begin to have communications, which are
much more evident when examined inferiorly. Thus the par vagum and
the great hypo-glossal nerves, send in going from their respective
foramina, numerous filaments to the neighbouring organs, whilst above,
the motores communes, the pathetici and even the trigemini shew this
arrangement less evidently; the auditory nerve does not communicate
with any other. 3d. The communications of the nerves of the spine are
more evident at their exit, especially in their anterior portion. The
deep cervical plexus, the brachial, lumbar, and sciatic, arise from
these communications, which are not so visible in the intercostal
nerves.

These kinds of plexuses have a particular arrangement. They are formed
in the following manner; each nerve, at its exit from the foramen,
sends a branch above and below, and also receives one; so that the
cords that succeed those that go from the foramina, arise from two or
three of these. These second cords, in dividing, send branches above
and below, receive them and form third cords; so that in the brachial
plexus, for example, when the nerves cease to communicate thus, and
are divided into separate trunks, that each may go to its destination,
it would be impossible to say correctly from which pairs they arise.
It would require a very tedious dissection to ascertain precisely from
what pairs come the median, the cubital, &c.

It is this consideration that has induced me not to describe the nerves
of the spine as it is usually done, that is, as going from such or
such pairs. I describe at first in each region the plexus that the
nerves form there in going out of the spine; thus, I expose before the
cervical nerves, the deep cervical plexus, before the brachial the
brachial plexus, and before the lumbar and sacral the plexuses of the
same name. The general arrangement, the form, the relations of these
plexuses being known, I pass to the description of the nerves that
go from them before, behind, without, within, &c. without regard to
the pairs of nerves that come through the foramina. This method has
appeared to me, moreover, to be extremely convenient for students.
Nothing, for example, is more complicated than the description of
the cervical nerves, by referring them to the pairs that first
furnished them. But understand well at first the deep plexus, arising
from the anastomoses of these pairs at their exit; afterwards class
the nerves, 1st. into internal, which go to the great sympathetic;
2d. into external, which are distributed upon the acromion and the
triangular space, bounded in front by the sterno-mastoideus and
behind by the trapezius; 3d. into anterior, which, winding upon the
sterno-mastoideus, form there with the branches of the facial a kind
of superficial plexus; 4th. into posterior, which go either to the
occiput, or to the posterior muscles of the neck; 5th. into those that
go inferiorly, as the diaphragmatic, as those that communicate with the
nervous branches of the hypo-glossal, &c. &c. In this way, you will
easily retain all the nervous distributions, because you will have one
point to which your memory will refer them all, and not to as many
centres as there are pairs.


_Internal communications of the nervous cords._

It is not only at their exit that the spinal nerves thus communicate.
The different cords of which each nerve is formed have precisely the
same arrangement, as may be easily seen in the great trunks, as in
the median, the cubital, the radial and especially the sciatic. By
separating the different cords of these nerves, we see that they are
not only in apposition longitudinally, but that they send numerous
filaments to each other. These communications do not resemble those
of the arteries, in which there is always continuity between the
communicating branches. Here there is only contiguity, and each of
the cords forming the nervous trunk is, as we shall see, composed
of filaments; now it is these filaments that frequently go from the
cord to which they belong to a neighbouring one; so that after a
short distance, the cords that began the nerve are not composed of
the same filaments as those that finish it; the whole becomes mingled
together in the course of the nerve. Thus the cords of the branches
of the brachial plexus, at its origin, are not arranged like those of
the branches that terminate it. For there is this difference between
the very evident plexuses formed by the nerves themselves and those
that are less evident formed during their course in their interior
even, viz. that in the first, it is the cords that go off and form
the interlacing, and in the second it is the filaments. I once amused
myself in tracing the filaments of the sciatic for a short distance;
now those which composed above the external cords, were found for the
most part below in the cords of the centre.

This remark proves that there are not nervous cords destined to
sensation and others to motion, and that if the same nerves do not
serve the double use, the difference is in the filaments, and not in
the cords.

In the interior of the vertebral canal, in which the nervous cords are
much insulated, for the want of cellular texture, the filaments that
compose them do not thus communicate with each other; there is not,
as without, a plexus in the interior of the nerve. This is remarked
particularly at the extremity of the canal, where the nerves run a long
course, as I have before said.

The communication of the nerves at their exit from their osseous
cavities is so general, that under this point of view it may be said
that they form on every side a kind of organ every where continuous,
an organ to which the optic, the olfactory, and the auditory nerves
only are strangers.

Besides, these kinds of communications, which are all made by
juxta-position, do not appear to have much influence upon the functions
of the nerves. Each of their cords, though belonging in its course
to many different trunks, can perform its functions in an insulated
manner; so can each filament, though concurring in its course to form
many cords of the same nerve.

I would observe with regard to this, that it is necessary to
distinguish accurately these communications from anastomoses, in which
two nervous filaments coming in an opposite direction, are confounded
and identified with each other, which is seen between those of the
facial, the sub-orbitary, the mental, &c.


_Nervous trunks._

After having thus communicated at their exit, the nerves separate from
each other and go towards the different organs. They form at first
considerable trunks, which pass through the great cellular interstices
and go over a greater or less extent. The form of these trunks is
sometimes flattened as in the sciatic; but it is most commonly rounded;
but the form does not affect nervous action, for the nerves that are
naturally round, when flattened by a tumour, perform their functions
as usual. In general, whenever it does not interfere with her design,
nature chooses the round form for the organs of animals. I would
observe also, that this form requires a system generally diffused,
and destined to fill up the spaces that necessarily exist between
round organs; this system is the cellular. It would be infinitely less
necessary, if the form of our organs was square, because there would be
less space between them.

The nervous trunks are of different length. Those of the extremities
hold the first rank in this respect, because the extremities being very
distant from the origin of the nerves, these trunks must of course
go over a certain extent before distributing their filaments. In the
trunk and the head, on the other hand, as the organs are presented
immediately to the nerves that enter them, the division into branches
is immediate, and the trunks are very short.

The nervous trunks are sometimes accompanied by a corresponding
arterial and venous trunk, as the brachial, crural trunks, &c.; at
other times, as the sciatics, and those of the par vagum, they go
separate.


_Of the nervous branches, &c._

As the trunks advance, they furnish here and there different branches;
these give out smaller ones, which send off those that are still
smaller, from which arise the last divisions. All these different
divisions take place at very different angles. The acute angle is the
most common. It is not a real origin, but merely a separation of many
cords united, that forms the branches, of one or two of these for the
smaller ones, of one cord only for the still smaller, and of separate
filaments for the last divisions. Thus this separation is made more or
less high, in different subjects. The place where it happens is never
exactly determined.

According to these divisions, the filaments which compose the cords
of each nerve and these cords themselves, are of different lengths;
the shortest separate first, then the middling; in fine, the longest
filaments of all go the whole extent of the nerve, and only terminate
where it ends. The brachial and crural nerves exhibit this arrangement
in a remarkable manner.

The nervous branches are almost all accompanied by an artery and a
vein, especially in the extremities; for in the trunk, there are
exceptions to this rule; in the neck, for example, the arteries often
cross the nerves at an angle, instead of accompanying them in their
course. In the head, many arterial branches are found thus separated
from the nervous. This circumstance is sufficient to make us attach
less importance than some authors have done, to this juxta-position of
the nervous and sanguineous systems. Moreover, if this juxta-position
was so essential, it would be seen with regard to the smaller branches;
but this never happens.


III. _Termination of the nerves._

I call that the termination, where each filament ends and not that only
where the whole trunk of the nerves terminates; so that the sciatic
terminates at the thigh, at the leg and at the foot, and not merely at
the extremity of this last. In fine, after what has been said already
and from what will be said further, the union of filaments into cords
and that of cords into trunks, is an arrangement disconnected with
their functions, and each filament should be examined separately.
The filaments of nerves have three different terminations. They are
continued, 1st. with other filaments of the same system; 2d. with the
filaments of the system of the ganglions; hence arise anastomoses. 3d.
They are lost in the organs.


_Anastomoses with the same system._

I have already observed, that true anastomoses should be distinguished,
from the junction of a cord that passes to a nerve more or less remote
from that to which it belongs, and which simply places itself by the
side of its filaments, so that it contributes with them to the nervous
cords. Thus there is no anastomosis in a plexus, in the union of the
chord of the tympanum with the lingual nerve, &c. So that though the
filaments of the different cords of a nerve pass frequently from one
to the other, so as to give to the nerve a net-work-like texture, and
not as anatomists say, a simple thread-like texture, still it cannot be
said that the cords of the same nerve anastomose with each other; there
is only juxta-position. On the other hand, the communication of the
great hypo-glossal with the cervical pairs, forms a true anastomosis,
because there is a continuity, and not merely contiguity of nervous
filaments.

If those physicians, who have considered the anastomosis as the
exclusive causes of all sympathy, had reflected how few they are in
comparison with what they appear at first view, they would have been,
by this simple reflection, led to a different opinion. In fact, it is
very evident, that though a filament is joined to a trunk, it has no
more relation to the filaments of that trunk, than these have among
themselves; that is to say, that there is nothing in common but the
cellular covering. The arterial and venous anastomoses are infinitely
more numerous than the nervous. I believe that they can perform a part
in neuralgia, in some sympathies even, a part foreign to the simple
communications of the filaments.

We can generally refer anastomoses to three classes. 1st. Two branches
belonging to different nerves, go on together, as in the example cited
above of the great hypo-glossal, and as also the branches of the facial
with those of the sub-orbitary, the occipital with the frontal, &c.
2d. The branches of the same nerve can unite together, as those of the
three portions of the trigemini. 3d. Sometimes the two nerves of the
same pair, or those of two different pairs, but coming from the two
halves of the nervous system, unite at the median line; some examples
of this may be seen in the superficial nerves of the neck, in those
of the chin, &c. This union does not take place upon the abdomen,
where the median line, entirely aponeurotic, has no nervous branch in
its texture. It is perhaps by these anastomoses that take place at
the median line, that we may explain, how certain motions can still
continue in a part affected with paralysis. This sort of anastomosis
is in general very rare. In the extremities it is evident, that they
cannot exist; in the trunk, they are hardly ever seen behind, and not
frequently before. If every pair of nerves gave examples of them, it is
clear that hemiplegia would rarely take place, because the sound side
of the brain or spinal marrow would through them have an influence upon
the nerves of the affected side.


_Anastomoses with the system of organic life._

This termination has a great analogy with the preceding, since there
are two nerves, which meeting at their extremity, are blended in such
a manner, that we cannot tell where one begins, or the other ends. I
shall treat of this in the following system.


_Termination in the organs._

The exposition of the following systems will show us the varieties
that exist as it respects the nerves. 1st. In some there are many of
them, as in the mucous, dermoid and muscular systems of animal and
organic life. 2d. In others we find fewer of them, as in the cellular,
glandular systems, &c. 3d. Some require a more attentive examination
than has heretofore been made of their nerves, which are little known,
as the serous, the medullary, a portion of the fibrous, &c. 4th. In
fine, many, as the cartilaginous, the fibro-cartilaginous, the pilous,
the epidermoid, the tendons of the fibrous, &c. are evidently destitute
of nerves.

We are ignorant of the situation of each nervous filament at its
termination; is it deprived of its covering, and does the pulp only
penetrate the interior of the fibres? In the optic nerve this last
arrangement is evident. The covering of the nerve is continued only to
the entrance of the eye, and the pulp is expanded to form the retina.
A similar expansion seems to take place in the olfactory and the
auditory. But nothing is known concerning any of the others.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


I. _Texture peculiar to this organization._

Every nerve is formed, as I have said, of a greater or less number
of cords lying in apposition to each other. These cords arise from
filaments likewise in apposition and united together, like the cords
by cellular texture. I have already mentioned how both are interlaced
in the interior of the nerve, so as to form a kind of plexus, which
differs from the true plexus only in this, that the branches applied to
each other, do not allow us at first view to see their intermixing.

The general character of the nervous cords varies considerably. 1st.
Their size is not always the same. Those of the sciatic and the crural
are smaller than those of the brachial nerves, except those of the
median. 2d. Some nerves, as the par vagum, are formed of one cord only,
divided by many furrows. Sometimes the filaments form around it a
net-work, a very delicate kind of plexus. 3d. In the same nerve, there
is sometimes united large and small cords; in many they are all equal,
as in the sciatic. 4th. The optic nerve, though furrowed in its whole
extent, from the commissure to the eye, does not appear to have in its
interior that interlacing, that the others evidently exhibit. 5th. In
the posterior part of this nerve, and in the trunk of the olfactory,
the cords are not distinct. 5th. Most of their nerves at their origin
are separate in their filaments; the trigemini on the contrary,
exhibit a common pulpous portion, in which all their's seem to be
implanted, &c.

It follows from all these considerations and many others for which
we are indebted especially to Reil, that the internal arrangement of
the nerves varies singularly, that each presents almost a different
texture, that under this point of view they do not resemble the
arteries and veins, which are every where the same, whatever be their
size, their course, &c. These varieties however, do not affect the
intimate structure, and our business is to describe this intimate
structure even to the last fibres that we can separate. Reil appears
to me to have thrown great light upon this subject. I have repeated
exactly his experiments; they have given results very analogous to
his. Some only have appeared to me so difficult, that I have not even
undertaken them. I have added to his researches many new facts as will
be easily seen by comparing his work with this article, in which will
only be found that which rests on accurate observation; I have omitted
all the theoretical ideas that Reil has added to the facts which he
offers.

We distinguish two things in every nervous filament, 1st. an external
membrane in form of a canal, in which is contained the medulla; 2d. the
nervous medulla itself; I shall now treat of each separately.


_Of the nervous coat and its origin._

This membrane forms for each nervous filament a true canal which
contains in its interior the medulla; as the veins and arteries contain
the blood, with this difference, that this medulla is stagnant, while
the blood circulates.

The origin of the nervous coat is very evident at the spinal marrow.
It is continued with the dense and compact membrane which covers its
white substance, and which is called the pia mater, though it does
not resemble the membrane of that name which surrounds the cerebral
circumvolutions. To see this origin well, this spinal membrane should
be cut longitudinally before or behind. The medulla then appears
whitish, soft and easily raised up. If it is raised and scraped with a
scalpel or any other instrument, the immediate covering of the spinal
marrow is thus separated from either side, especially if precaution be
taken to wash it. It might be had in the form of a sac, by cutting out
a piece of the medulla of a certain extent and then pressing out the
medullary substance at the two ends. In this double experiment, the
nerves remain attached to the membrane separated from its medullary
substance, because their nervous coat is continued with it. It is
exactly as if a number of small arterial filaments went from the aorta;
the parietes of this artery would be to those of these filaments, what
the pia mater of the spinal marrow is to the coat of the nerves which
go from it. Only the nerves are white, because their medulla fills
them; whereas the canal to which they belong is transparent, because it
is deprived of its own medulla. I do not pretend however, that there is
a perfect identity between these two membranes, since we do not exactly
know the nature of either; I refer only to their anatomical arrangement.

As to the origin of the nerves contained in the cranium, those coming
from the tuber-annulare and its dependancies, that is to say, the
elongations that it receives from the cerebrum and cerebellum, have
an arrangement analogous to that of the nerves of the spine. However,
the difference of thickness and density of the pia mater establishes
differences. In fact the pia mater which covers these parts is
different from that which serves as a canal to the spinal marrow; it
is much softer, less adherent, is torn with more ease, and appears to
be analogous to that which covers the cortical substance of the brain.
The coat of the nerves of the tuber annulare, which is manifestly
continued from this portion of the pia mater, exhibits partly this
character. At the place of their union, it is more soft than in the
canal, hence the extreme facility with which, as I have observed, the
origin of these nerves is broken. Moreover, the continuity with the pia
mater is proved by the facility of raising the nerves by raising this
membrane; almost always both are attached together.

As to the nerves of the cerebrum, the olfactory, loosely covered by
the pia mater, does not appear to have a coat of its own. The optic is
evidently destitute of it from its origin to its junction with that of
the opposite side. Then it begins to be covered with it; and canals
are formed by it, filled with medullary substance, and which continue
even to the retina. Besides, this nerve differs singularly from the
others, 1st. because it has a kind of general nervous coat; 2d. because
its medullary substance is more abundant and more easily obtained, its
canals being larger; 3d. because these canals, pressed against each
other, give it the appearance in the interior of a continued body; but
by cutting it longitudinally, it is easy to see that the medullary
substance is separated there by partitions. The auditory nerve has also
a very peculiar texture.

From what has been said, it is evident that the pia mater has greater
analogy with the coat of the nerves, than any of the other membranes;
it may be said to be almost the same in the spinal canal. Observe, in
fine, that this membrane, which has never yet been well described,
evidently presents three great modifications, according as it is
examined; 1st. upon the grey substance that surrounds the whole of
the cerebrum and cerebellum, where it ¡s reddish, extremely vascular,
loose, slightly resisting, and very easily raised; 2d. upon the white
substance that covers anteriorly and posteriorly the tuber annulare and
the four great elongations that it receives from the cerebrum and the
cerebellum, where it is less red and where it begins to become more
firm, more adherent, and less easily torn; 3d. upon the whole spinal
marrow and upon the corpora pyramidalia and olivaria. It is thickened
and condensed at the furrow that separates these eminences from the
tuber annulare, then, increasing in thickness below, becoming whitish,
resisting, &c. it has an appearance entirely different from what it had
in the cranium. It might be said to be a membrane wholly different. It
has four times the thickness of the tunica arachnoides.

In most of the subjects that I have examined it is much stretched,
and compresses, if it may be so said, the medullary substance for
which it serves as a canal; so that when a small opening is made in
it the medullary substance immediately comes out. But I presume that
it is looser during life. Besides, this state of compression is much
less sensible towards the superior part than towards the middle and
inferior, on account of the difference of thickness. I would remark,
that the density of the pia mater of the spine is necessary to prevent
injuries of the medullary substance, which is very soft at one part,
and which at another is smaller than the diameter of the canal; so that
it can be shaken there; an arrangement wholly different from that of
the brain, which completely fills the cranium.

Arising in the manner we have pointed out, the coat of the nerves
passes with them through the cavity of the cranium and that of the
spine. It is very distinct in these cavities, because it is not
surrounded there with cellular texture, but only with the arachnoides,
which may be raised with great ease; instead of using the different
preparations that Reil mentions for the purpose of separating the
coat of the nerves from the cellular texture, it is infinitely more
convenient to examine this membrane upon the last nerves of the spine,
which are, as we have seen, remarkably long.


_Action of certain substances upon the nervous coat; its resistance,
&c._

Without the osseous cavities, the nervous coat embedded in the cellular
substance, adheres to it strongly, but appears evidently to be of the
same nature as in the interior. We are ignorant what its nature is,
whether it is the same as that of the pia mater, of the medulla, of the
tuber annulare and its dependancies. It appears to have great affinity
with the cellular texture. It is transparent and consequently free from
the colour of the nerves; hence why, when they have been deprived, by
alkalies, of their pulp, they lose a great part of their whiteness.

The coat of the nerves is one of the parts of the animal economy which
are hardened with the greatest ease, especially at the instant the
nerves are immersed in an acid slightly concentrated, particularly
the nitric and sulphuric. I have not observed in any other texture
this phenomenon in so remarkable a manner; the nerve is suddenly
diminished in size and twisted in different directions; now we shall
see that the medullary substance is in no way concerned in this
phenomenon. The action of boiling water produces an analogous effect;
by it the nerve is wrinkled, contracted and hardened; then, after the
ebullition has continued for a certain time, it gradually becomes
soft, and its whitish colour is changed to a sort of yellowish tint,
very different from that of boiled tendon or aponeurosis. The action
of the acids continued for some time, produces an effect analogous to
that of ebullition. To the sudden hardening like horn which the nerve
undergoes, soon succeeds a softness so great that at the end of a short
time it is easily moved under the finger, and afterwards becomes partly
dissolved.

The alkalies do not produce the horny hardening in the nervous coat
any more than in any other texture of the living economy; neither do
they dissolve it. Hence, undoubtedly, why Reil, having macerated for
some time a portion of nerve in soap-boilers lie, was able to separate
accurately the nervous coat from its medullary substance.

The action of water upon the nervous coat produces a phenomenon that is
exhibited by few others of the animal textures. Far from softening it
immediately and then reducing it to pulp, it seems in the beginning to
increase its consistence. A nerve soaked in water becomes there harder
and more resisting, and this state, at the ordinary temperature of
cellars, continues for a month and a half, and even two months. It is
only at the end of this time and frequently longer, that the texture of
the nervous coat is gradually softened, and broken, and finally ends by
being diffused like other macerated textures. I have not repeated this
experiment in a very warm temperature, which has always succeeded in
that of winter and spring.

The coat of the nervous filaments has a very great resistance, because
it is, in proportion to the medullary substance that it contains,
infinitely thicker than the membranous canal of the spinal marrow.
It is thus that the proportion between the thickness of the vascular
parietes and the fluids they contain, is much less in the great trunks
than in the small branches; the fluid considerably exceeds the solid
in the first, there is at least an equality in the second. Thus a very
small nerve would support a much greater weight than the spinal marrow.
I believe that among the textures which are arranged in filaments or in
elongated tubes, this and the arterial, next to the fibrous, afford the
greatest resistance; they surpass the venous, the muscular, the serous,
&c.


_Medullary substance; its origin._

This substance occupies the interior of the nervous canal, in the same
way as the substance of the spinal marrow fills the canal formed by
the pia mater. This medullary substance is whitish, as that of the
brain and spinal marrow; it gives the nerve its colour. It is in much
greater proportion in the optic nerve than in any other; it is found
exclusively in that part of it posterior to the junction of the two,
as well as in the olfactory. It is so abundant in the auditory that it
seems to form a great part of it. In general, I think at the origin in
the osseous cavities, it predominates over the nervous coat, but in
the course of the nerve, the nervous coat is the greatest. Hence the
greater degree of resistance of the nerves in the second, compared to
what they have in the first.

This substance appears to be continuous with the medulla of the brain,
the tuber annulare and its dependancies, and the spinal marrow. I
think, no one can deny this continuity with the origin of the optic and
olfactory nerves, in which more of this medullary substance is found
than in the other nerves. In the auditory, also, it is very apparent;
in the spinal marrow, by scraping this white substance from the
internal surface of the pia mater, so as to leave the nerves adhering
to this membrane, we see evidently at the place where these nerves go
off, that there is an elongation penetrating their nervous coat.


_Comparison between the medullary substance of the brain and the
nerves._

What is the nature of the medullary substance of the nerves? I have
endeavoured to institute a comparison between it and the cerebral
substance; there is considerable analogy under some points of view and
some difference under others.

1st. Submitted to drying in the open air, in small slices to prevent
putrefaction, the white substance of the brain becomes yellow, and
acquires considerable consistence. The nerve dried becomes yellow also,
hardens and contracts. These changes are undoubtedly owing in part to
its coat. The proof of this is that if we dry the covering that the
pia mater furnishes to the spinal marrow, a covering that has great
analogy to the nervous coat, the new qualities it acquires are very
analogous to those of the dried nerves. But this does not prevent the
medullary substance of the nerve from contributing also to the yellow
colour by the evaporation of its watery part. I will make, in regard
to this, a remark that I think interesting; it is this, that water has
an influence upon the whiteness of a number of textures which become
yellow or greyish by its subtraction, and are whitened again by its
addition. Thus we have the power of making yellow, by drying, all the
fibrous organs, the skin, &c. and of restoring them afterwards to their
primitive colour. Thus also the serous surfaces, the cellular texture,
&c. that have become greyish from drying, regain their whiteness when
immersed in water, if they have not been long dried. The epidermis of
the sole of the foot and the palm of the hand turns from grey to white,
when it has been immersed for some time in water.

2d. The cerebral substance and that of the spinal medulla easily become
putrid when submitted to the combined action of water and air; they
become of a greenish colour and have acid sufficient to redden blue
paper. Of all animal substances, I think they exhibit this phenomenon
the soonest. The nervous medullary substance, on the contrary, resists
putrefaction much longer. The nerves are among the slowest of all
the parts of the animal economy to become putrid. During life they
are often found untouched in a gangrenous limb, in the middle of an
abscess, &c. In a dead body which is putrid, they preserve their
whiteness and consistence, while the other parts are black and soft.
I have observed that the water in which the nervous system has been
macerated has but little odour, but that that in which the brain has
been macerated is fœtid. These phenomena clearly would not take place
if the medullary substance of the nerve became as easily putrid as that
of the brain. It is manifest, however, that it is especially to the
nervous coat, that the nerves owe this sort of incorruptibility; for I
have observed, that the optic nerve, in which the medullary substance
predominates, and the olfactory and auditory, which are abundantly
furnished with it, become putrid sooner than the others. I have
remarked also uniformly, that whilst the white substance of the spinal
marrow becomes putrid, its covering remains untouched.

3d. The medullary substance of the nerves, as well as that of the brain
and spinal marrow, does not seem to be susceptible of any kind of
horny hardening. This is very evident when we immerse the two last in
boiling water, in a concentrated acid, &c. We may be convinced as to
the first, by submitting to the same experiment the soft nerves that
have their nervous coat pretty distinct. To this also must be referred
the following phenomenon; when the anterior part of the optic nerve is
put into boiling water, the nervous coat becomes wrinkled, its canals
shrink, and the medullary substance not contracting in proportion, is
forced towards the extremities, which become consequently enlarged.
As this substance is in less proportion in the other nerves, this
phenomenon is less apparent in them; it takes place, however, and
this explains the small round tubercle that is seen at each end of
boiled nervous filaments; it is the medullary substance that produces
these enlargements. This phenomenon is very evident in the spinal
marrow, which, being immersed in boiling water, suffers the compressed
substance to escape, either at the extremities, or at any openings that
may be made in its covering. Thus in boiling a head, the dura mater
detached from the cranium contracts powerfully in hardening like horn,
compresses the cerebral substance which does not contract like it, and
sometimes breaks it, so that it escapes into the space that the boiling
has produced between the dura mater and the cranium.

4th. When the cerebral substance is agitated in water, it becomes
suspended in it in the form of an emulsion, as has been observed by
Fourcroy, then it is precipitated to the bottom of the vessel. A
similar emulsion is made by the olfactory nerves, the posterior part of
the optics, &c. When the anterior part of these, in which the nervous
coat is very evident, has been soaked some time in water, and commonly
even without this, a large quantity of whitish substance can be pressed
out of them, which is evidently analogous to the medulla of the brain,
and which colours the water that receives it. From the other nerves in
which the medullary substance is much less abundant, it can often be
forced out by pressure, from the cut ends of the filaments, especially
if they have been previously macerated in an alkaline solution.

5th. Boiling hardens the brain, and gives it a greyish and dingy
appearance, very similar to what is seen in ataxic fevers. The same
phenomenon takes place in the soft nerves. In the others, the nervous
coat is in too great a proportion to the medullary substance to
allow us to see what happens to this last. It is to this property of
coagulating by heat, which the brain has, that must be referred the
flaky precipitate that is obtained in a heated cerebral emulsion.

6th. All the acids that are much concentrated harden the brain very
evidently, the instant it is immersed in them. The sulphuric afterwards
softens it, and finally reduces it to pulp, if it is not diluted. The
nitric makes it yellow only, in hardening it. The muriatic has the
least action upon it. The effect of acids upon the soft nerves is
very analogous to this. In those in which the coat is very distinct,
the horny hardening of which this coat is the seat, conceals all the
sudden phenomena relative to the medullary substance. When the coat
is softened and dissolved, this substance has appeared to me to be
diminished in consistence and altered by the acids, whereas that of the
brain keeps always the same degree of hardness, if the acid be not too
much concentrated.

We all know that alkohol hardens the brain. This hardening, the
effect of acids, of boiling, and of alkohol, is a phenomenon that
the anatomist can avail himself of to give the parts he dissects a
firmness, that will enable him to examine them better. It approximates
this substance to the albuminous fluids. I say that it approximates it,
for there are still great differences between them, of which, I think,
we know but little.

7th. The alkalies have an effect upon the cerebral substance precisely
opposite to that of the acids. They make it fluid, and even dissolve
it completely after a short time. I have observed, with regard to
this, that the grey substance is much quicker altered by them than
the white, which is softened, disappears in part, but still leaves a
considerable portion that is not dissolved. From whatever part we take
these two substances to submit them to the action of the alkalies, the
result is the same. The alkalies act also evidently upon the medullary
substance of the nerves. This action, as I have said, has been of great
assistance to Reil in his experiments.

8th. Thouret and Fourcroy have discovered, that the brain, after
being buried, lessens considerably in size, and changes to a brittle
substance, capable of softening under the finger, miscible in water,
exhaling a disagreeable odour, having the properties of ammoniacal
soap, and resembling very closely spermaceti in its nature. Do the
nerves undergo a similar alteration in their medullary substance? We
know nothing at present by which we can determine this question.

9th. The muriate of soda, when sprinkled upon slices of the brain and
the pulpy nerves, increases their consistence.

10th. The digestive juices generally alter with ease the medullary
substance of the brain. I think, however, that they would have a much
more powerful action upon it in a natural than a boiled state; for
all the re-agents are in general more powerful in the first of these
states. We know that most carnivorous animals esteem the cerebral
substance delicious food. Those that feed upon birds, the parietes of
whose craniums are easily broken, almost always eat the brain first.
The weasel, the polecat, &c. furnish examples of this. Man considers
the brain as one of the most dainty parts of the animal. The nerves are
much less easily digested; but this depends wholly upon their coat,
which does not yield so readily to boiling as the other parts. For
example, the tendons, which are as hard or harder than the nerves in
a natural state, become much softer by boiling. We can distinguish in
boiled meat each of these parts. The first, in its gelatinous state, is
more pleasant and digestible.

11th. The cerebral medullary substance is very different in the brain,
the tuber annulare and its elongations, and the spinal marrow. If we
examine it attentively, in all these we must perceive the difference
in colour, consistence, hardness, humidity, and, without doubt also
in its very nature, though our knowledge is not yet sufficiently
advanced to decide with certainty upon this last point. Has the
nervous medullary substance analogous differences? I believe that it
is similar in the same nerve, but that it varies in different nerves
according to their uses. In fact, when the internal arrangement of the
cords and the filaments which constitute the nerve, differs so much,
when there are varieties in the nervous coat also, why should the
medullary substance be every where of the same nature? Certainly the
colour and consistence of that of the olfactory are different from
that which is forced out from the anterior part of the optic. That of
the auditory does not resemble that of the trigemini, &c. We have seen
that each of the organs of sense has its peculiar sensibility, which
places it exclusively in relation with particular bodies in nature,
that of the eye with light, that of the ear with sounds, &c. I think
that these differences of sensibility depend upon the difference of
organs; but I am persuaded that the organization of the nerves has much
influence, and that the optic nerve would be unfit to transmit tastes,
the auditory to propagate impressions made by light, &c. If we examine
attentively, we shall see an essential difference of structure between
the nerve of the eye, of the nostrils, the ear, and that of the taste,
which approximates, in thickness, the nerves of motion. As to the
nerves of touch, they do not require a peculiar texture; for I shall
prove hereafter that a particular kind of animal sensibility is not
necessary for this sense, but that this general property is sufficient
for it, since its accuracy depends especially upon the mechanical form
of the hand. As to the nerves that go to the voluntary muscles, as
these muscles are every where analogous and perform similar functions,
I think their medullary substance is the same. But in the par vagum,
whose destination is so different, why do not the varieties of internal
organization coincide with that of the texture which we observe in
dissecting this nerve? We may say the same of many nerves that go to
parts whose sensibility presents an entirely different modification.

This then is a comparison between the cerebral pulp and the medullary
substance of the nerves, which may throw some light upon their
difference and their analogy. I have not availed myself of all the
details of the chemical experiments that have heretofore been made upon
the brain; I have only given the principal phenomena of the action of
different re-agents, phenomena, all of which I have repeatedly proved.

The medullary substance of the nerves is not arranged in filaments.
It appears to be analogous to the white substance of the spinal
marrow which is a real jelly, stagnant in the canal of the pia mater,
which serves as a reservoir for it. Besides, examination proves this
assertion in the optic, auditory, olfactory nerves, &c. In general I
think, that this substance, as well as the cerebral, would be ranked,
if they were deprived of the vessels that run through them, rather
among the fluids than the solids, or they would form a medium of
connexion between the two.


II. _Parts common to the organization of the nervous system of animal
life._


_Cellular texture._

The nerves are entirely destitute of this texture in the interior of
the cranium, and the spine; but out of these they have a great quantity
of it. A large external layer, first covers and then connects them with
the neighbouring parts. This layer is looser than that which surrounds
the arteries. Fat often accumulates in it; sometimes, though rarely it
is the seat of dropsical effusions.

From this common layer go off different elongations which communicate
with the cellular texture of the neighbouring organs, and form a medium
of union between the nerve and these organs. Within, there are other
elongations that go between the nervous cords, and separate them from
each other, and form for them kind of canals. When a nerve has been
macerated some time in diluted nitric acid, the cords become separated
from their sheath, which is to them what the layer of which we have
spoken is to the whole nerve. These cellular canals often contain also
fat in the great nerves, in the sciatic there is always some of it.
Hence it is that when we dry these organs, there is almost always as I
have observed, a fatty exhalation upon their surface; and that, when
they are immersed in any alkaline solution, they have evidently an
unctuous and truly saponaceous deposit.

Finally new elongations going from the cellular canals that surround
the cords, cover the nervous filaments with canals still smaller.
Here, there is never any fat or serum, and the cellular texture has in
part that peculiar nature which characterizes the sub-arterial, the
sub-nervous texture, &c.; perhaps even the nervous coat is nothing but
this texture considerably condensed. Besides, the cellular texture
so connects the one to the other, the cords of the nerves, and the
filaments of these cords, that no motion can take place there.


_Blood vessels._

Each nerve receives its vessels from the surrounding trunks, which
send to it branches which penetrate from all sides to the interior.
The optic is an exception to this rule; the membrane that surrounds
it prevents the vessels from entering it laterally. An artery passes
through it in the course of its axis and sends out different branches.

In the other nerves, the arteries run first in the cellular texture
between the cords, and are of a size there more or less considerable,
according to the nervous trunks. Sometimes this size increases
considerably. For example, in popliteal aneurism, the artery of the
sciatic nerve has been seen with a caliber more than three times its
natural size.

The arteries running between the cords, send off a number of little
branches that go into all the interstices of the filaments. In fine,
from these arise the little capillary arteries which are spread upon
the coat of the nerve, cross it and are continued with the exhalants
of the medullary substance. We readily see this vascular arrangement
in the spinal marrow. Numerous ramifications are spread first upon the
dense and firm pia mater, which there takes the place of the nervous
coat; they then penetrate the medullary substance, and are lost in
continuation with the exhalants.

The veins follow in the nerves a course analogous to the arteries;
however, in carefully dissecting many great nervous trunks, I have been
convinced that their branches do not go out of the nerves at the place
where the arteries enter. This arrangement is analogous to that of the
brain, where the arteries enter below and the veins go out above.

Many authors, particularly Reil, have overrated the quantity of blood
that goes to the nerves, because, in order to ascertain it, they have
made use of fine injections which have entered the capillary system,
which does not commonly contain red blood. I am convinced by dissecting
the nerves of living animals, the only means of having an accurate idea
of what takes place in a natural state, how uncertain this method is
here as every where else.

The blood that goes to the nerves, like that which is sent to the
brain, is a stimulant that supports their action. When this stimulant
is increased the nervous excitability increases, as Reil was convinced
by rubbing the nerves of a frog, so as to redden them by the quantity
of blood that was brought there. Does this fluid, when carried in great
quantity to the nervous system, sometimes interrupt its functions,
as happens to the brain in sanguineous apoplexy? I have not had an
opportunity yet of making this observation in a very decided manner in
the great number of bodies that I have opened. Only the nerves are a
little more reddish in some cases than others. Do these cases coincide
with certain determinate diseases? I have not any knowledge upon this
point. As to the pretended compression of the origin of the nerves, by
the blood that is carried to the brain and spinal marrow, whoever has
examined the relations of the nerves with the vessels of the base of
the cranium, will see that such a compression is not probable. Besides,
most of the holes through which the little arteries penetrate into the
interior even of this viscus, have a caliber greater than that of the
arteries; so that how full soever they may be, they cannot press upon
their parietes. I can only conceive of a compression at the origin of
the nerves, from effusions at the base of the cranium.


_Exhalants and absorbents._

We cannot discover these vessels in the nerves; but nutrition supposes
their existence there. It appears that this function is performed in
the following manner; the exhalants receive from the arteries, with
which they are continuous, the medullary substance which they deposit
in the canal of the nervous coat, which is, if I may so express myself
the reservoir of this substance, that is afterwards taken up by the
absorbents.

Many think that the nervous coat is the secretory organ of this
medullary substance, which oozes out of its parietes, to lie in its
cavity. I do not believe it, 1st. because the olfactory nerve would not
then be able to support itself, any more than the posterior portion
of the optic. 2d. The cerebral membranes are not concerned with the
secretion of the pulp of the brain, they only permit the vessels to
pass, which enter this organ to deposit it there. 3d. There is the same
arrangement at the spinal marrow, the pia mater of which has so great
an analogy with the nervous coat. The vessels cross this membrane,
then losing themselves, as I have said, in the medullary substance
constantly renew it; so that if it was possible to remove this
substance without touching the vessels, these would hang loose by their
extremities in the canal of the pia mater. Thus, in some very soft
fungi, the vessels cross here and there the substance that they deposit
in their interstices, and would produce a vegetation like net-work,
if we could remove this substance and leave them untouched. 4th. In
the optic nerve the vessels evidently are not confined to the nervous
coat; they penetrate also the canals it forms, and deposit there the
medullary substance.

Every thing appears then to prove, that the nervous coat is no more
the secretory organ of the nervous substance, than the pia mater is
of the cerebral substances or that of the spinal marrow. It may have
uses of which we are ignorant; but the principal certainly is that of
a covering; it is the passive part of the nerve, the medulla being the
part essentially active.

From this way of describing the production of the nervous medullary
substance, it is evident that it does not proceed from the brain,
but that it is formed in each nerve by the means of the neighbouring
vessels. Hence why the inferior portion of a cut nerve does not decay;
why a ligature that interrupts the cerebral communications, does not
prevent the nervous nutrition; why in most paralyses in which the
nervous system ceases to correspond with this organ, it is supported as
usual.

From these and other considerations, Reil considers the nerves as
having an entirely insulated existence, as being bodies by themselves,
communicating only on one side with the brain, on the other with the
different parts. This assertion is true as it respects nutrition, but
as it regards the functions it is in part false; for the nerves are
evidently only conductors; it is from the brain that goes the impulse,
and there too is the sensation. In animals with white blood, and even
in those with red and cold blood, these functions concentrated in
the brain, in man and the neighbouring species, are, it is true more
generally spread throughout the nervous system, hence it is without
doubt, that we can remove the brain, the heart and the lungs in
reptiles without immediately destroying life; it is on this account,
that I have remarked in my Researches upon Death, that we should never
avail ourselves of experiments upon animals with red and cold blood,
to draw conclusions concerning those with red and warm blood. But in
these and in man especially, it is undeniable, 1st. that the brain is
the centre of animal life, which ceases when the action of this viscus
is destroyed, as is proved by apoplexy, asphyxia, &c.; 2d. that it has
also immediately dependant upon it organic life, though in an indirect
way, that is by presiding over the mechanical functions of respiration,
which by ceasing, stop the chemical, then the circulation, then the
secretions, &c. so that the continuance of the two lives, and a serious
injury of the brain, are two things wholly incompatible. Authors who
have written upon life, the nervous system, &c. have usually considered
them in too general a manner. The relations of the functions are
absolutely different in animals with cold blood and in those with warm;
that which is true for one, is not so for the other.


_Nerves._

Does the nervous coat receive small nervous branches? Do these small
branches penetrate the nerves, as the small arteries spread on the
coats of the large ones? Anatomical examination does not render this
probable.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


I. _Properties of texture._

Few systems exhibit these properties more obscurely than this. If we
draw a nerve, in an opposite direction, in a living animal, it is
extended with difficulty, makes great resistance, and acquires a
length but little more than what is natural to it; this appears to
depend particularly on the nervous coat. The medullary substance would
yield much more. We know how much that of the brain is stretched in the
dropsy of the ventricles. If a great trunk is distended by a subjacent
tumour, as in popliteal aneurism, by a swelling in the axilla, &c. it
is flattened down like a ribbon; its filaments are separated and lay
at the side of each other, and it is consequently much widened. Thus
distended, these filaments can yet sometimes transmit sensation and
motion, at other times these two functions are annihilated there.

In general, a sudden distension interrupts them much more certainly
than that which comes on slowly. Hence why the luxation of the head of
the humerus often occasions paralysis, whilst it rarely happens from
very large chronic tumours in the axilla. Spontaneous luxations of
the vertebræ, which always come on slowly, are rarely accompanied by
paralysis, an accident which is always the result of those that happen
from external violence. It is thus in the brain, osseous tumours,
large fungi which increase slowly, disturb its functions but little,
while the least depression of a bone of the cranium, that succeeds
a fracture, entirely deranges them. In hydrocephalus, also, a great
collection of serum has oftentimes but little effect upon sensation,
which is nearly destroyed, when a little more of this fluid than common
is exhaled in the ventricles, as happens in some kinds of apoplexy.

When a large cavity, like the abdomen, is distended, the nerves that
are there yield partly because their curves disappear, and partly
because they are really elongated; there is also a greater separation
of them.

The contractility of texture is still less evident than the
extensibility. A nerve cut transversely, does not retract at the two
ends, which remain opposite to each other, like those of a tendon.
In amputation, the end of the nerve remains longer than those of
the muscles, the skin, &c. This is sometimes the cause of a painful
pressure from some part of the dressing.


II. _Vital properties._

These are less evident in the nerves, than would be thought at first,
from the opinions of a great many physicians, who have made these
organs perform almost the whole part in diseases.


_Properties of animal life._

The nerves must be considered, in regard to sensibility, in two points
of view. 1st. We should examine that which is inherent in them. 2d. It
is necessary to consider the part which they take in that of all the
other organs.


_Animal sensibility inherent in the nerves._

This property is, of all others, the most strongly marked in the
nerves. Exposed and irritated, they cause great pain. By tying,
pricking, cauterizing, or exciting in any way a nervous filament, we
uniformly obtain that result so well known in practical surgery, and by
those who make experiments upon living animals.

This property would seem at first to establish a very great difference
between the medullary substance of the nerves and that of the brain,
especially towards the convexity of this organ; for we can almost with
impunity irritate this after having removed the cortical substance.
It is only deep in the brain that the animal sensibility becomes
strongly marked, and even there it is not so much so as in the nerves.
Observe, however, that in the experiments upon the cerebral pulp you
destroy the organ itself that perceives, that, without which it could
not have animal sensibility, and whose derangement would consequently
have an inevitable influence upon this property; whereas the seat of
perception being untouched when we irritate a nerve, the pain is more
sensibly felt. It is, in fact, principally in the medullary substance
of each nervous filament, that animal sensibility resides. The nervous
coat possesses a much less degree of it. Hence why simple contact,
without pressure, occasions but little pain; hence, also, why a nerve
can almost with impunity be immersed in a purulent, ichorous fluid,
or even in the sanies of cancer; hence why the contact of the air
occasions but little pain when the nerves are merely laid bare, as I
have had frequent occasion to see in animals; why, in a variety of
cases, different tumours, in whose atmosphere the nerves are situated,
have no influence upon them. The membrane of each filament is truly in
every case a kind of covering that protects its medullary substance, in
which the sensibility particularly resides. As to the cellular texture
which enters into the composition of nerves, it has, as elsewhere, no
connexion with this property. Hence why we can, as I have often done
upon a living animal, separate from each other, with the point of a
very delicate scalpel, the different filaments of a nerve of some
size, of the sciatic, for example, when they have first been laid
bare, without giving the animal much pain. In these experiments, it is
easy to be convinced of the kind of insensibility of the covering of
each nervous filament. It is necessary to pierce it and arrive at the
medullary substance in order to produce pain.

In experiments, the animal sensibility of the nerve seems to be
gradually exhausted, and finally ceases. I convinced myself of this
upon the eighth pair of nerves, in making my experiments upon the
injection of black blood into the brain. At the moment the nerve
is raised and drawn to detach it from the carotid with which it is
connected, the animal cries out and is much agitated; but after the
same thing is repeated two or three times, he no longer gives any
signs of pain. If we cease to excite the nerve for an hour or two, the
sensibility returns with great energy, when it is drawn again. These
experiments furnish a result very analogous to that of experiments
relative to the animal contractility of muscles, experiments that are
known to all physiologists.

The animal sensibility of the nerves has a peculiar character which
distinguishes it from that of all the other systems. It is this
character which gives a peculiarity to the pain in these organs, which
does not resemble that which has its seat in the skin, in the mucous
surfaces, &c. What particularly fixed my attention upon the difference
of pain of which each system is the seat, was the question of a man of
great mind and coolness, whose thigh was amputated by Desault; he asked
me, why the pain he felt when the skin was cut, was wholly different
from that which he experienced when the flesh was cut through in which
the nerves, scattered here and there, were divided by the knife, and
why this last sensation differed entirely from that which was felt
when the marrow was divided. This embarrassed me then, when I was
wholly engrossed in surgery, and had studied physiology but little; I
have seen since, however, that it is to be referred to that general
principle of which I have already spoken, and which determines, that as
each system has its peculiar kind of animal sensibility in a natural
state, it has it also in a morbid state, that is to say, in pain.

A very clear proof of this assertion, as it regards the nerves of
animal life, is the peculiar kind of pain that is experienced in the
tic douloureux, a kind that is unlike that of any other system. The
sciatic disease, which has its seat in the nerve of the same name,
has often been confounded with rheumatism, which affects the muscles
or tendinous parts; but the difference of pain alone is sufficient to
distinguish them. Mr. Chaussier has very judiciously taken for the
first character of neuralgia, the nature of the pain. Every one knows
the peculiar sensation of numbness and afterwards of pricking, that is
felt when a superficial nerve, as the cubital, &c. is compressed. No
other organ in the economy gives the same sensation from the same cause.

The animal sensibility of the nerves has another peculiar character,
which consists in this, that the local irritation of a trunk often
produces suffering in the whole branches. 1st. We know that when the
cubital is compressed at the elbow, the pain extends along its whole
course, and that it spreads over the whole external part of the leg,
when the peroneal suffers. 2d. In the tic douloureux of the face, in
the sciatic disease, and generally in all that class of diseases of
which Mr. Chaussier has given a sketch under the name of neuralgia, an
analogous observation may be made. 3d. When we wound, without dividing,
one of the branches of the saphena, the internal cutaneous or muscular
cutaneous, in the operation of blood-letting, the subjacent part
frequently becomes numb, then painful and swelled; the irritated point
is a centre, whence go forth, along the whole course of the nerves,
painful irradiations, the consequences of which oftentimes cannot
wholly be stopped, except by dividing the irritated trunk. Thus, in
tic douloureux, the division of the nerves has sometimes overcome the
disease, though we shall succeed less frequently here by these means
than in the preceding case, where the affection is local, while here it
is usually extended along the whole course of the nerve. 4th. I have
irritated, in a dog, the sciatic nerve with nitric acid; the whole limb
was swelled and painful the next day. I have at this time another, the
whole of whose fore limb is swelled, because I passed a pin, two days
before, through one of the anterior nerves, taking care to entangle
some of the nervous filaments. This precaution is essential, for I
passed a pin through the cellular texture that separates the filaments
of the sciatic, without producing any effect. I should observe,
however, that these different experiments do not always succeed, and
that I have irritated a nerve at one point sometimes without producing
any effect. 5th. The ligature of nerves is rarely followed by these
accidents, because the communication with the brain is interrupted, by
the very means that irritate, and because the medullary substance is
flattened and its sensibility destroyed. However accidents have often
happened from tying a nerve in the operation for aneurism, and though
there is no real danger in making the ligature, all good practitioners
advise that it should be avoided.

These different considerations prove in a positive manner, the
influence that a portion of an irritated nerve has upon the animal
sensibility of all the subjacent ramifications. Physicians do not
give sufficient attention to this cause of pain, which is often very
extensive without any apparent wound. An irritated nerve in a fracture
of the ribs, in that of a limb, in a wound, in a tumour, &c. can
produce at a distance a number of phenomena, the cause of which often
escapes us, and which we should soon discover if we reflected upon the
distribution of the branches going from the trunk of the nerve that is
near the affected part.

Why in these phenomena, is the animal sensibility of the nerve below
the affected part always raised? Why does this phenomenon never take
place on the side of the brain, though it is in this direction that
sensation is conveyed in a natural state? I know not.

No other system, among those all of whose parts are united like the
nervous system, presents the same phenomenon. The arterial, the venous,
the absorbent, never feel thus in their different ramifications, the
affections of any one part of their trunk. The cellular is not affected
at a distance by the diseases of one of its parts. In the mucous
which is continuous, a part being irritated, oftentimes others also
are affected, as when the stone in the bladder produces suffering in
the glans penis; but there is always an intermediate portion more or
less considerable, which remains without being painful; this is a real
sympathy; whereas in the other, the whole nervous trunk suffers, from
the affected part to the nervous extremities.


_Influence of the nerves upon the animal sensibility of all the organs._

After having considered the animal sensibility in the nervous system
itself, we must examine the part this system performs in this property
described in relation to all the other organs, in which it is often the
means of transmission between the organ that receives the sensation and
the brain which perceives it. So that when any point of the nervous
system suffers, as in the preceding cases, the portion of nerve that
is between this point and the brain, serves to conduct the impression.
Thus in animal contractility, the nerves are always intermediate to the
brain, which is the principle of the motion, and to the muscle that
executes the motion. There is, however, more difficulty in the first
kind of transmission than in this, which, to be explained accurately,
requires that we should distinguish two kinds of sensations perceived
by the internal sensitive principle, 1st. the external; 2d. the
internal.

The external sensations are of two orders, 1st. the general; 2d. the
particular. The general sensations are derived from the sense of
feeling, as we shall see; they indicate the presence of the bodies
that are in contact with the external organs; they give the general
impressions of heat and cold, moisture and dryness, hardness and
softness, &c.; they produce a painful sensation when the external
organs are torn, pricked, or acted upon by chemical agents, &c. These
sensations may originate upon the skin, the eye, the ear, the mouth,
the nostrils, upon the beginning of all the mucous surfaces, &c.; all
the bodies in nature may produce them, and all the external organs
may perceive them. 2d. The particular sensations are relative to
certain determinate external bodies, or to particular emanations from
surrounding bodies. Thus the eye exclusively perceives the light, the
nose odours, the ear sounds, the tongue tastes, &c. These particular
sensations are to a certain degree independent of the general ones;
thus the eye may cease to see, the nose to smell, the ear to hear,
the tongue to taste, and yet these different organs may preserve the
faculty of perceiving the general attributes of heat and cold, moisture
and dryness, &c. and may be the seat of real pain. Every day we see
patients affected with gutta serena suffering from the eye, those
affected with deafness having pains in the ear, &c. I have seen a
man that was deprived of the sense of smell from the use of mercury,
and who still would suffer very much if the pituitary membrane was
irritated, &c. It is necessary, then, to distinguish in the organs of
sense, that which belongs to the general sense of feeling, from that
which is dependant upon the particular kind of feeling that each has
separately.

If now we examine the part of the cerebral nerves in these two kinds
of animal sensibility, it appears that they are equally essential to
one and the other. 1st. This is without doubt as it regards the organs
of sense; the sight, the hearing, the smell, or the taste, could never
continue after a serious injury of the optic, auditory, olfactory,
gustatory nerves, &c. I do not speak of the touch, which does not
require, like the other senses, a peculiar modification of animal
sensibility, but only the general feeling, with a peculiar form in the
organs that are provided with it, so as to mould themselves to the
figure of external bodies. 2d. As to the general sensations, whenever
the cutaneous nerves cease entirely to act in any part of the skin, it
becomes absolutely insensible; it may be pinched, irritated, burnt,
&c. without feeling it. The perfect paralyses of sensation exhibit
in man this phenomenon, which can easily be produced in animals by
cutting or tying all the nerves that go to a limb. When the general
feeling is left in the pituitary membrane after the loss of smell, the
olfactory nerve is alone paralyzed; if the nerves that enter by the
spheno-palatine foramen, through the anterior and posterior openings of
the nostrils, cease also to act, then the general feeling is likewise
lost. It is the same with regard to the other organs of sense.

I believe, then, that the nerves are actually necessary to the external
sensations, whatever be their nature. Observe also, that all the organs
with which external bodies can be in contact, as the dermoid system,
all the origins of the mucous systems, and the organs of sense, are
provided more or less abundantly with cerebral nerves; none of them
receive the nerves of the ganglions. This external portion of the
nervous system of animal life is very considerable; united to the
portion that goes to the voluntary muscles, it forms almost the whole
of this system, which has but very few appendices in the organs of
internal life.

As to the internal sensations, they have phenomena much more obscure
than the preceding. The brain is undoubtedly the centre of these
sensations, as well as those which take place without it; in fact, if
the action of this organ is suspended by wine, opium, or any other
means, though acute pains may affect the internal organs, these pains
are not perceived. Thus when the brain has received a concussion,
though the impression of sounds, of light, of odours is made as usual
upon the ear, the eye and the nostrils which are uninjured, yet there
is neither hearing, seeing or smelling. But how do the impressions
made upon the internal organs get to the brain? Here are different
phenomena, that it is impossible to conceive of well, by supposing that
the nerves are charged with transmitting these impressions exactly like
those which are experienced by the external organs.

1st. There are organs that have the most acute sensibility upon the
slightest touch, and which however receive very few apparent nerves;
such is the medullary membrane of the long bones. 2d. Certain organs
in which the cerebral nerves evidently enter, as the liver, the lungs,
&c. can be irritated in animals, without seeming to give them much
pain. 3d. The muscles of animal life, in the structure of which so many
nerves enter, in which also the branches of these perform so great a
part as it relates to animal contractility, do not occasion much pain
when their texture is cut without entangling the nervous filaments that
penetrate them. 4th. The ligaments, that no nerve enters, are the seat
of acute pain when they are distended, as my experiments have proved.
It is the same as it respects the tendons, the aponeuroses, &c. 5th.
All the organs with the structure of which the nervous system has
manifestly no connexion, transmit however to the brain the most painful
impressions when they are inflamed, &c. &c.

I could bring many other facts, which the opponents of Haller have
carefully collected; but these are such, that we cannot hesitate to
admit, that the opinion of this celebrated physiologist should not be
entirely acceded to.

All that we know upon the internal sensations is, that, 1st. there is
an organ in which the cause of sensation is seated; 2d. that this organ
transmits to the brain the particular modifications that it experiences
in its vital forces. But we are wholly ignorant of the medium of
communication of one with the other. Hence, why, in my division of the
vital forces, I have avoided a systematic basis. The distinction of the
two kinds of sensibility, of the three kinds of contractility, rests
wholly upon the observation of facts. Such is the obscurity of the
phenomena of life, that I doubt if we shall ever be able to establish
divisions from a knowledge of the nature and essence of the vital
forces.

I observe that there is a great difference between animal sensibility
and contractility; that in the first, the nerves are in certain cases
the evident agents of communication between the organs that receive the
impression and the brain that perceives it, but that in other cases,
we know not the kind of relation; whilst in the second, it is always
manifestly by the nerves that the brain communicates with the muscles,
and that the organs can never execute a voluntary motion without the
influence of the cerebral nerves.

Let us confine ourselves to this general view, which is from accurate
observation; let us abandon reasoning, where experiments are not the
basis of it. Some modern authors have been less judicious; they have
admitted a nervous atmosphere extending more or less remotely, and
acting at a determinate distance; so that though an organ may not
receive a nerve, it is sufficient that it should be in the atmosphere
of a nervous cord to be the seat of sensations. This ingenious idea
of Reil, should be placed at the side of a great number of those that
Bordeu has scattered in his works, and which are rather proofs of an
ingenious author, than an accurate and judicious mind, hostile to
every opinion not founded on rigorous experiment. In fact, what is
this atmosphere? Is it an emanation that is constantly made at the
exterior of the nerves? Is it a fluid that is independent of them,
and that nature has placed around each nervous cord, as it has placed
the air around the earth? Is it a power that has been given to the
nerves to act at a distance without intermediate bodies? Some galvanic
experiments seem to prove something similar to this in the nerves;
but these experiments have no relation to the transmission of animal
sensibility. Moreover, when pain takes place in the middle of a very
thick tendon, in the centre of a large articulation, as that of the
knee for example, it would be necessary that the atmosphere of nervous
activity should extend sometimes even an inch. Why is there not
suffering produced, by the irritation of an insensible part that is
at the side of a nerve, or even connected with it, whilst the pain is
very acute in an inflamed part, though it is at a distance from every
nervous cord? Would the nerves then have also, a sphere of activity for
motion? But why should the contiguity of the nerve never be sufficient
to produce it in the muscles? Why is it not the same of sensation?


_Animal contractility. Influence of the nerves upon that of the other
parts._

The texture of the nerves is wholly destitute of this contractility.
No kind of sensible motion is ever observed in them; they perform
however an essential part in this property, considered in relation to
the muscles of animal life. We shall see that they are the essential
agents which transmit to them the principle of motion; so that animal
contractility always supposes the exercise of three successive actions,
viz. that of the brain, the nerves and the muscles.

The opinions of physiologists have been singularly divided upon the
manner in which the nervous influence is propagated. Some have admitted
a kind of vibration, others a fluid pervading the insensible canals
of these organs. This last hypothesis is still in much credit. What
has not been said upon the albuminous, electric, magnetic nature, &c.
of this fluid? The article upon the nerves, in most physiological
treatises, is almost wholly devoted to the examination of this
question, but I shall say nothing upon it, for we do not know any thing
that rests upon experiment. Moreover, are we not able without knowing
the mode of the nervous action, to study and analyze the phenomena of
the nerves? It is the common fault of all the ancient physiologists,
to have wished to begin where they should one day end. Science was in
its infancy when all the questions they discussed turned upon the first
causes of the vital phenomena. What is the result of it? An immense
deal of rubbish, and the necessity of finally coming to the accurate
study of these phenomena by abandoning that of their causes, until we
have observed enough to establish theories. Thus mankind have disputed
for ages, upon the nature of fire, of light, of heat, of cold, &c.
until philosophers finally perceived that before reasoning it was
necessary to have a foundation upon which their reasoning should rest,
they then sought for these foundations and thus created experimental
philosophy. Thus interminable disputes have existed in the schools upon
the nature of the soul, of judgment, &c. until metaphysicians have
perceived the necessity of analyzing the operations of our intellectual
faculties before they can know their essence. Each of the natural
sciences has almost had two epochs; 1st. that of the last age, in which
first causes were the only subject of discussion; an epoch useless to
the sciences; 2d. that in which they have begun to be composed of the
study of the phenomena only that experience and observation offer.
Physiology has still one foot in the first epoch, whilst it has placed
the other in the second. Physiologists of the present day should
advance it still further.


_Properties of organic life, considered in the nerves._

They are in general very indistinctly marked in these organs. They
want sensible organic contractility. The insensible and the organic
sensibility are there only to that degree that is necessary to
nutrition; for these properties have no other functions to support
there. Thus observe, that almost all the diseases of the nervous
system are affections of the animal sensibility, and that but very few
suppose a disorder in the organic. There is hardly ever an alteration
in the nervous texture; no tumours, fungi, ulcerations, &c. as in the
systems in which the organic properties are predominant. Thus morbid
anatomy finds but little to exercise itself upon in the nerves.

The continual motion of a part sometimes increases a little the organic
sensibility of the nerves that are found there, makes their nutrition
more active and their size more apparent; but generally this phenomenon
is infinitely less sensible in them than in the muscles. On the other
hand though the nerves may have lost the faculty of transmitting
sensation and motion, this last especially, they still preserve for a
long time the same degree of organic sensibility, and their nutrition
is the same as usual. I have many times examined comparatively
the nerves of the sound side and those of the side affected with
hemiplegia; I have never found in them any difference. It is only when
the limb becomes atrophous, which never happens except at the end of a
long time, that the nerve diminishes in size.

I have often searched to see, if, when a part, in which there are
nerves, has been a long time the seat of uninterrupted painful
sensations, the nutrition of these is altered, and consequently if
their organic sensibility is affected. I have dissected the stomachic
cords in cancers of the pylorus, the uterine nerves in those of the
womb; I have not found any sensible difference, except in two subjects,
in whom they were a little enlarged. Desault discovered also in a
body affected with carcinoma of the fingers, the median nerve of
uncommon size; but this phenomenon certainly is not as general, as
the dilatation of the arteries in this kind of tumours. As to acute
pains, like those of rheumatism, of different inflammations, &c.
however severe they may be, they have no effect upon the nutrition of
the nerves which transmit them. When the pain is seated even in the
nervous texture itself, as in the tic douloureux, there is oftentimes
no organic affection. At least Desault had occasion to open two
patients that had had that disease, and the nerves were the same on
each side. This, however, deserves further research, and it may be,
that in many cases, the internal substance of the nervous cords is a
little altered; for I preserved the sciatic nerve of a patient, who had
experienced very acute pain in its whole course, and this had at its
superior part, a number of little varicose dilatations of veins that
entered it.


_Influence of the cerebral nerves upon the organic properties of other
parts._

Have the cerebral nerves any influence upon the organic sensibility
of other parts? I think not, and this is the essential difference
that distinguishes it from animal sensibility, which we can with
difficulty conceive of, especially in its natural state and in the
external sensations, without the nervous influence intermediate
between the brain and the part that receives the impression. To prove
this assertion, let us examine the functions that depend upon organic
sensibility. These are, 1st, the capillary circulation, 2d, secretion,
3d, exhalation, 4th, absorption, 5th, nutrition. In all the phenomena
of these functions, the fluids make an impression on the solids of
which we have no consciousness, and in consequence of which the solids
react. It is by the organic sensibility that the solid receives the
impression, it is by the insensible contractility that it reacts; now
in none of these cases do the nerves appear to perform an essential
part.

1st. The capillary circulation exists in the cartilages, the tendons,
the ligaments, &c. in which the nerves of animal life do not enter.
Inflammation, which is only a derangement, an increase of this
capillary circulation, takes place in these organs, as well as in those
that are the most nervous; what do I say? where the nerves are the
most numerous, this affection is not the most frequent; the muscles
are an example of this. The tongue, whose surface alone has more than
four or even five times the quantity of nerves of the mucous surface,
is not so often inflamed as the rest of this system. The retina,
which is entirely nervous, is rarely inflamed. Nothing is more rare
as I have said, than the inflammation of the nerves themselves; the
internal substance of the brain is hardly ever inflamed. On the other
hand, examine the serous surfaces, the cellular texture, in which there
are infinitely less nerves; the capillary circulation is constantly
active there, and inflammation comes on. In the limbs of paralytic
patients, in animals in whom the nerves are cut in order to render a
part insensible, does not the capillary circulation continue as usual,
when the nervous action has ceased there? Have you ever accelerated
this circulation in a limb, or produced inflammation, by increasing
convulsively by irritation the action of the nerves of this limb? The
phenomena of convulsions and those of paralysis, are wholly distinct
and have no analogy with those of inflammation; this would not be so,
however, if the cerebral nerves had any influence upon them. In the
first phenomena, it is the animal sensibility that is altered; in the
second it is the organic; this is then independent of the cerebral
nerves.

2d. Exhalation is the second function over which this last property
presides. I refer to the dermoid system to prove that the sweat is
independent of the nerves. I would only observe here, that in the
synovial, in which there is an evident exhalation, there are hardly
any nerves; that the serous surfaces and the cellular texture, so
remarkable for this function, are, as I have said, almost destitute
of them; that whenever there are accidental exhalations, as in cysts,
hydatids, &c. the nerves have evidently no influence, as the tumour
is uniformly without them; that by acting in any manner upon the
nervous system, as by irritating the nerves, the brain, or the spinal
marrow, in order to excite this system, as by tying or cutting the
first, and compressing the second, to annihilate or weaken its action,
the cellular, serous, synovial, or cutaneous exhalations are never in
any way affected; and that finally the diseases of the nervous system
have no other influence upon this function, than what is derived from
general sympathy.

3d. As much may be said of absorption. It is during sleep that the
skin oftentimes absorbs most easily; now there is at that time, an
intermission in the action of the nervous system, as well as of that
of the brain. This intermission, to which it is periodically subject,
ought to produce one in the serous, synovial, medullary absorptions,
&c.; but yet they go on constantly. It is the same of all the functions
over which the organic sensibility presides; they are essentially
uninterrupted, though the nervous and cerebral actions are essentially
intermittent.

4th. The same observation may be made concerning the secretions,
notwithstanding what Bordeu may have said. For the rest, I refer upon
this point to the glandular system.

5th. Nutrition takes place in parts that evidently receive no nerves,
as in the cartilages, the tendons, &c.; in paralyzed limbs also its
alterations are always independent of those of the nervous system.
Those people in whom this system is the most elevated, who are the
most sensitive, are not those in whom nutrition is the most active.
In no experiment, I believe, has any one been able to influence
nutrition by acting upon the brain, the nerves, and the spinal marrow.
Marasmus undoubtedly succeeds all prolonged nervous diseases; but it
is a phenomenon common to many diseases. In palsy, the long rest, as
well as the deficiency in the action of the nerves, has an influence
in producing atrophy; but it is a long time before this manifests
itself. Who does not know that often at the end of two, three, or
four years even, the diseased limb is exactly of the size of the well
one? Moreover, natural nutrition obeys the same laws as accidental
nutrition, as that which takes place in the formation of fungous and
sarcomatous tumours, and fleshy granulations. Now the cerebral nerves
have evidently no connexion with all these productions; they are
never found in them; a phenomenon very different from that which is
offered by the arterial system, which is almost always developed in a
remarkable manner in these tumours. In fine, we shall see hereafter
that the nerves do not increase in proportion with the parts to which
they are distributed.

From what has been said, it is evident that all the phenomena, over
which preside what are commonly called the tonic forces, viz. organic
sensibility and insensible contractility, are completely independent of
nervous action; and consequently that these properties would not, like
those of animal life, require this action. Each kind of sensibility
has its morbid phenomena over which it presides. Inflammations,
suppurations, the formation of tumours, dropsies, sweating,
hemorrhages, disorders of secretions, &c. &c. belong to the alterations
of the organic sensibility, whilst every thing like spasm, convulsion,
paralysis, trance, torpor, injury of the intellectual functions, &c.
&c. every thing, in fact, which tends in diseases to destroy our
relations with surrounding bodies, belongs to the alterations of animal
sensibility or contractility, and implies a greater or less degree of
disorder in the nervous system.

In general, the diseases that affect the functions of animal life are
of a nature wholly different from those which destroy the harmony of
organic life. They have not the same character, the same progress,
and the same phenomena. Place on one side the injuries of the
external senses, blindness, deafness, loss of taste, &c.; those of
the internal senses, mania, epilepsy, apoplexy, catalepsy, &c.; those
of the voluntary motions, &c.; on the other, fevers, hemorrhages,
catarrhs, &c. and all the diseases that disturb digestion, circulation,
respiration, secretion, exhalation, absorption, nutrition, &c.; we
shall then see what an immense difference there is between them.

Physicians have used too vaguely the term nervous influence. If in
medicine, as in physiology, we had accustomed ourselves to use those
expressions only to which was attached a precise and definite meaning,
this would have been employed much less frequently.

It appears that the nerves have some influence still unknown, in
the production of animal heat. The following facts relate to this
influence. 1st. In aneurism, the ligature of the nerve is often
followed by a sensation of general torpor and coldness in the limb.
2d. Sometimes, in hemiplegia, the affected part is of a temperature
below what is natural, though the pulse may be as strong in this side
as the other. 3d. One of the characters of ataxic fevers, the principal
seat of which is in the brain, is the remarkable irregularity in the
temperature of the different parts of the body. 4th. Animals, with a
strongly marked nervous system, as quadrupeds and birds, are those of
all others, in whom the degree of natural heat is the highest. 5th.
I knew a person that had had the cubital nerve divided by a piece
of glass above the pisiform bone, and whose little and ring fingers
of that hand uniformly remained colder than the rest. 6th. Often in
luxations, the compression of the nerves by the heads of the bones,
produces an analogous effect, &c. &c.

However, the heat is not always increased, when the nervous action is
augmented, nor is it always lessened when this action diminishes; there
are as many cases in which the heat appears to be independent of the
nervous system, as there are where it appears to be connected with it;
so that we are still confined here to the collection of facts, without
drawing general conclusions from them.


_Sympathies._

I divide what I have to say upon the sympathies of the nerves, as I did
that which was said upon their vital forces; that is to say, I shall
examine first the relations that each nerve has with the other parts,
then I shall speak of the general influence that the nervous system
exercises upon the sympathies and of the part it takes in them.


_Sympathies peculiar to the nerves._

There is no doubt as to the relations of the nervous with the other
systems, of those which it has with the muscles and with the brain.
In fact, these relations are natural; for the one cannot be affected
without the other's feeling it. These three organs can in this respect
be considered under one point of view. Thus too, the pulsation of the
arteries is always connected with the action of the heart, &c. Every
idea of sympathy excludes that of a natural connexion of functions.
Barthez is mistaken upon this point. I speak only of the unnatural
relations of the phenomena that take place between an organ and a
portion of the nervous system which is not connected with it by the
natural order of life; now, thus considered, the nervous sympathies are
very numerous.

1st. Two nerves of the same pair often sympathize with each other. We
know in medicine the relation there is between the two optic nerves;
the one being disordered in its functions, the other frequently becomes
so. This happens more rarely with regard to the ears, the nostrils, &c.
though it sometimes takes place in them. Often in neuralgia (a word
which I adopt very willingly and which is wanted in the science to
express a class of diseases every genus of which has a distinct name)
often I say in neuralgia a nerve being painful, the corresponding
one becomes so sympathetically. I have an example of this at present;
it is a woman, who for two months has been afflicted with sciatica of
the left limb. In changes of weather, a pain precisely similar spreads
itself along the course of the nerve of the opposite side. I applied
two blisters upon the thigh first affected; the pain disappeared in
both sides at the same time at the end of twelve hours. Thus, in order
to cure pains in both eyes, it is oftentimes sufficient to act only
upon one, &c.

2d. Sometimes two nerves of the same side sympathize without belonging
to the same trunk. Thus an injury of the frontal nerve has been many
times followed by a sudden blindness in consequence of the affection of
the optic nerve, &c.

3d. In other cases it is the branches of a common trunk which influence
each other reciprocally, as when a branch of the superficial temporal
is wounded in the operation of arteriotomy, the whole face, which also
receives its nerves from the fifth pair, becomes painful, &c.

4th. At other times, it is not among themselves that the nerves
sympathize, but with other organs; and then sometimes they influence,
at others they are influenced.

I say first they influence; thus a nerve being irritated in any way,
a number of sympathetic phenomena take place in the system. Diseases
frequently show these facts. It is thus in tic douloureux and analogous
diseases, in which the nervous texture is particularly affected,
sometimes the animal sensibility is raised in various remote parts,
and hence the pains that are often experienced in the head, in the
internal viscera, pains that cease when the cause that supported them
has disappeared. Sometimes it is the animal contractility; hence the
convulsions that occasionally take place in the muscles that receive
branches from the affected nerve. In some cases it is the sensible
organic contractility which is sympathetically excited by the nervous
affections. Thus in the paroxysm of neuralgic pains there is often
spasmodic vomiting, the action of the heart is hurried, &c. We can by
experiments produce the same phenomena. Thus by acting upon the nerves
of the superior or inferior extremities, by irritating them any way
after they have been laid bare, I have frequently produced vomiting, or
convulsions in muscles that were in no way connected with the nerves I
irritated.

In the second place, the nerves can be influenced by diseased organs;
thus in many acute and chronic affections, sympathetic pains spread
along the course of different nerves, particularly in the extremities.
As the animal sensibility is the predominant property of the nerves,
it is almost always that which is brought sympathetically into action.
Physicians have not distinguished with sufficient accuracy in the pains
of the extremities, that which belongs to the nerves, from that which
has its seat in the muscles, the aponeuroses, the tendons, &c.


_Influence of the nerves upon the sympathies of the other organs._

Authors have been much divided upon the cause that supports sympathies.
How can an organ which has no relation with another that is frequently
very remote, influence it so as to produce serious diseases there,
merely because it is itself affected? This singular phenomenon is often
witnessed in a state of health; but it is so wonderfully increased in
diseases, that if we could remove from them the symptoms that are not
exclusively dependant upon the derangement of the function particularly
affected, we should find but little difficulty in their study or
treatment. The moment an organ is affected, all the rest seem to feel
simultaneously the disorder it experiences, and each seems to be
agitated in its own way in order to expel the morbific matter that has
seized upon one of them.

Most authors have believed that the nerves were the general means of
communication that connected the organs with each other, and also
their derangements. The anastomoses have appeared to them to be
destined to this use; and with this opinion, some have thought that the
brain was always mediately affected, but this others have rejected.
The communication of parts by the means of blood vessels has also
been thought to be a cause of sympathies. Others have admitted the
continuity of the cellular texture; some, that of the mucous membranes.
I shall not undertake to refute in detail these different hypotheses;
I would observe only, that as no one is applicable to all the cases of
sympathy, it is because the aberrations of the vital forces have been
described in too general a manner; it has been thought that a single
principle presided over them, and this principle has been sought for.
But in order to ascertain the cause that supports sympathies, they
must be divided, as I have divided the vital properties; for as each
of these properties supposes different phenomena, so the sympathies
that put them in action, differ also. To make this distinction of the
sympathies more evident, let us suppose a diseased organ, the stomach
for example; it becomes then a centre, whence go forth numerous
sympathetic irradiations, which bring into action in the other parts,
sometimes the animal sensibility, as when pains of the head come on;
sometimes contractility of the same species, which is the case when
worms in the stomach produce convulsions in children; sometimes,
sensible organic contractility, which, raised in the heart by certain
pains in the stomach, occasions fever; oftentimes the insensible
organic contractility and the organic sensibility, as when the gastric
affections increase sympathetically the secretions that take place upon
the tongue, and produce there a mucous coat. There are then sympathies
of animal sensibility and contractility, and of organic sensibility and
contractility. This being premised, let us examine the cause of each.

1st. When the animal sensibility is sympathetically raised in a part,
this does not always depend on nervous communications; for oftentimes
the organ in which is the material cause of pain does not receive any
nerves, as the tendons, the cartilages, &c.; then it cannot communicate
by them with that in which this pain is found. On the other hand we
have seen above that it is still very uncertain if the nerves are the
only agent that carry to the brain the internal sensations; we cannot
say then that the affected organ acts at first upon the brain by their
means, and that this reacts afterwards upon the part in which the
pain is seated, by the nerves that go to it. Can we conceive that the
cellular texture should be an agent for the communication of pain,
which is insensible to it itself? Observe also that the parts that are
the most abundantly supplied with this texture, as the scrotum, the
mediastinum, &c. are not those that sympathize the most. The same is
true of the blood vessels, which, by their nature, are not fitted to
transmit animal sensibility, and which besides do not exist in all the
organs.

It appears that all sympathetic pains are nothing but an aberration of
the internal sensitive principle, which refers to a part a sensation,
the cause of which exists in another. Thus when the extremity of the
stump gives the patient pain, who has just undergone amputation, the
sensitive principle perceives the sensation correctly, though it is
deceived as to the place whence it comes; it refers it to the foot
which no longer exists. It is the same when a stone irritating the
bladder, produces pain at the glans penis. Thus all sympathy of animal
sensibility is characterized by the integrity of the part in which we
find the pain, and by the cessation of this sympathetic pain, when the
cause that acts elsewhere has ceased. It is then probable, when a part
suffers sympathetically, that that which is the seat of the material
cause of the pain acts first upon the brain, either by the nerves, or
by some means with which we are unacquainted, and that when the brain
perceives the sensation, it is mistaken as to it, and refers it to a
part from which it does not arise; or it refers it at the same time to
the part from which it arises, and to another where it does not; this
happens frequently. The stone for example, produces suffering at the
same time in the bladder and at the end of the glans penis.

These aberrations of animal sensibility then exist entirely in the
brain; it is an irregularity, a derangement of perception; this
irregularity presents phenomena analogous to the following; we often
refer to the skin a sensation of heat, as we shall see, though caloric
is not disengaged there in a greater quantity than usual. We know that
oftentimes the sensations of hunger and that of thirst are purely
sympathetic, and that the cause which produces them in a natural state
does not then exist in the stomach or intestines. We know the illusions
of vision, of hearing, of the smell even, &c. We have not studied
sufficiently the irregularities of perception; those of the memory,
the imagination, the judgment, &c. have been analysed. These, however,
have been almost forgotten. They perform the greatest part in animal
sensibility.

2d. Animal contractility supposes constantly nervous action, when it
is put in exercise sympathetically. In fact we shall see that this
property cannot be exerted without the triple action of the brain,
of the nerves that go to the muscles that move, and of the muscles
themselves. When a muscle of animal life is brought into action by the
irritation of any distant organ, by the distension of the ligaments
of the foot for example, this organ acts at first upon the brain,
which then reacts by means of the nerves upon the voluntary muscles
that are concerned in convulsions. The following is an experiment by
which I satisfied myself of the cerebral and nervous influence in
the sympathies that occupy us. I cut all the nerves of the inferior
limb of one side, in different animals, and I afterwards irritated in
a thousand different ways, very irritable parts, as the retina, the
pituitary membrane, the marrow of the bones, &c. I produced in this way
a number of sympathetic phenomena, sometimes of organic contractility,
as vomiting, involuntary evacuations of urine, fecal matter, &c.
sometimes of animal contractility in the muscles whose nerves remained
untouched. But the muscles whose nerves were cut, were never brought
into action. I have very frequently repeated these experiments, which
would have certainly produced results, if the nervous communications
could, without the intervention of the brain, make the muscles
of animal life contract. I would observe upon this subject, that
sufficient regard has not been paid in experiments upon sensibility, to
the sympathetic phenomena. I do not know even that these phenomena have
been the object of any experiments upon animals, before those of which
I have here given the first results, and which I propose to multiply
under other points of view. There are then two things in all sympathy
of animal contractility, viz. 1st, the action upon the brain of the
organ that suffers, by means, of which as yet we know but little; 2d,
reaction of the brain upon the voluntary muscles. In this last period
of sympathy, the nerves of animal life are the agents constantly
necessary.

3d. The cerebral nerves and brain have evidently no connexion with
the sympathies that put in action sensible organic contractility
or irritability. If they had, the affected organ would first act
upon the brain, and this would react upon the involuntary muscle;
thus, when tickling produces vomiting, there would be an action of
the skin upon the brain, and of the brain upon the stomach. Now
the brain never exerts any influence upon the involuntary muscles;
whatever be the irritation that the nerves experience which go to
them, the muscles remain unaffected. Then although the brain may be
sympathetically affected, it does not react upon the involuntary
muscles; the cerebral nerves then have no connexion with the sympathies
of sensible organic contractility. The continuity of the membranes is
not a more substantial cause, and this is the proof of it. We know
that by irritating the uvula, the stomach heaves; now as the mucous
surface of the one and the other is the same, we might attribute this
sympathetic phenomenon to this circumstance. I have then made a wound
in the side of the neck of a dog; taken hold of the œsophagus and cut
it transversely; the uvula has been afterwards irritated; the dog,
notwithstanding the interruption of continuity, made efforts to vomit
as before. Let us acknowledge then that we do not know the cause of the
sympathies of sensible organic contractility.

4th. As much may be said of the sympathies of organic sensibility
and insensible contractility. We have proved that the nerves have
no influence upon these two properties; that by acting upon them
we neither increase or diminish them in any manner, and that their
diseases do not disturb the functions over which these properties
preside. Then when they are sympathetically disordered, the nerves
appear to have no connexion with these phenomena. Thus, 1st, every
sympathetic exhalation, as the sweats of phthisical patients, certain
serous infiltrations that take place almost instantaneously, &c.;
2d, all secretions of the same kind, as those which appear in a
number of diseases afford us examples of them, &c.; 3d, all analogous
absorption, the three functions over which the preceding properties
preside, are evidently unconnected with the nervous influence of animal
life. I shall say the same of the cellular, vascular influences, &c.
Certainly we have no data, by which we can explain how these means of
communication produce sweat when the lungs are affected, and saliva in
the mouth when the membrane of the palate is irritated, &c.

From all that has been said it follows, 1st. that the sympathies of
animal sensibility appear to be in the greatest number of cases an
aberration of the principle that perceives in us, and which is deceived
as to the place in which the causes of sensation act; 2d. that the
sympathies of animal contractility require inevitably the intervention
of the brain, but we know not how the part affected acts upon this
viscus, though we know very well how this viscus sympathetically
excited reacts upon the muscles to make them contract; 3d. that the
causes of the two kinds of organic sympathies are absolutely unknown
and that a thick veil hides the agents of communication which connects,
in this case, the organ from which the sympathetic influence goes to
that which receives it.

It is this obscurity of the sympathetic causes, that has made me
entirely neglect every kind of hypothetical opinion, in classing
the sympathies in this work, in which I examine them in each system
of organs. I have had regard only to a natural division, to that
indicated by the vital forces of which the sympathies are but an
irregular exercise. Now by limiting ourselves to the most rigorous
observation, it is evident that this division is the only one that is
admissible; and I believe that there is no other to be employed, until
our knowledge shall be sufficiently extended to admit of their being
classed by the causes that produce them, and not by the results they
present.

Besides I cannot recommend too strongly the necessity of distinguishing
what belongs to them from that which arises from the natural connexion
of functions. Observe what takes place in syncope, apoplexy and
asphyxia; one organ is disordered; all the others soon cease to act.
Sympathies have no part in these phenomena. Physicians have been
much embarrassed by classing these affections, sometimes as if they
belonged to the nerves, at others to the sanguineous system, &c. This
is what takes place in each.

1st. The heart first ceases to act in all syncopes, whether they arise
from passions of the mind, disagreeable odours, &c. The circulation
being stopt, the brain is no longer excited by the blood; it ceases
its action, and the whole of the animal life is interrupted. The
organic life that the blood supports, is thus suddenly annihilated. 2d.
Asphyxia commences in the lungs. Respiration is deranged; it sends to
the brain blood that cannot excite it; this ceases to correspond with
the senses, to determine involuntary motions, &c. &c. 3d. It is in the
brain that apoplexy has its first seat; thus animal life is immediately
interrupted; then, when it is very severe, the brain not being able
longer to support the motions of the intercostal muscles, these motions
are stopt; the mechanical, then the chemical action of the lungs
ceases; circulation cannot go on, and organic life is interrupted. We
see then, that in all the phenomena of these affections, the injury of
one organ, produces, by a natural consequence, the suspension of the
action of the others.

This is wholly different in the sympathies. Thus the functions of the
skin being suspended, sometimes the lungs, sometimes the stomach,
and sometimes the intestines, feel it and are affected by it; these
sympathetic phenomena may manifest themselves or may not; on the
contrary, whether it be the cerebral, pulmonary or cardiac action,
that is deranged, it is impossible but that the others should be
consequently affected.


III. _Properties of reproduction._

Are the nerves reproduced when they have been cut? The experiments of
many distinguished anatomists evidently prove that they are. What is
the manner of this reproduction? If we examine the results of these
experiments it is easy to see that there is nothing peculiar in the
nervous system, that it is a simple cicatrization analogous to the
callus of bones, to the cicatrix of the skin, &c. When a nerve has
been cut, its two ends inflame, the cellular texture that it contains
sends forth granulations by the property of reproduction that it
possesses. These granulations meeting, form adhesions that unite the
two divided ends of the nerve. As the cellular texture, the means of
union, grows from the cut extremity of the nervous coat, as well as
from that which is between the cords, it partakes of the nature of
the nervous coat, and becomes a parenchyma of nutrition, whose mode
of organic sensibility is analogous to that of the nerves, and whose
vessels deposit there medullary substance, which gives a new appearance
to the nervous cicatrix, and makes it resemble very nearly the texture
of the nerves themselves. However, as the granulations arising from
the divided ends are not made in a regular manner, there is never at
the place of union a thread-like arrangement as there is in the nerve
itself. Thus the callus of a long bone, though analogous to this bone,
is never regularly arranged like it in longitudinal fibres; thus a
cutaneous cicatrix has always an irregularity in its organization,
which arises from the irregular manner in which the parenchyma of
cicatrization has been developed.

The cicatrization of nerves is then analogous to that of bones. In
the first period there is inflammation; in the second, growth of the
cellular texture which is to serve for the nutritive parenchyma; in
the third, adhesion of those parts that have grown; in the fourth,
exhalation of the medullary substance into the parenchyma. It is
this medullary substance that makes this cicatrix differ from the
osseous, in which phosphate of lime and gelatine are deposited, from
the muscular, in which there is fibrin, &c. Sometimes there is an
enlargement in the form of a ganglion, at the place of the reunion of
the nerves; this depends upon the greater granulation of the cellular
texture. Thus sometimes the callus is enlarged; at others, if the
contact has been exact, we perceive but a slight difference; these are
varieties that do not affect the nature of cicatrization.

It follows from this, that the regeneration of the nerves, which has
lately been the object of much research, and which Cruikshank, Monro,
&c. have particularly demonstrated, has nothing peculiar in it; that
it is only a consequence of the general laws of cicatrization, and a
proof of the constant uniformity of the operations of nature, though
these operations present at first sight different results. A nerve,
that is cut out in its whole course, is never reproduced like a nail,
or the hair, which take a length, form, and appearance exactly the same
as they had before they were removed. It is under the point of view
that we have presented them, and not under this last, that the nervous
reproductions should be described.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


I. _State of this system in the Fœtus._

The nervous system of animal life is one of the first that is
developed. If the heart is the first that has motion, the brain is the
first that has any considerable size. The disproportion of the head to
the other parts is remarkable in the first periods after conception;
its size is monstrous when compared with that of the subsequent ages.
Now it is evident, that it is the brain that produces this, and that
the increase of the size of the bones and the membranes that surround
it, is owing to it.

We may say that by creating first the heart and the brain, and
developing them much sooner than the other organs, nature wished first
to establish the foundations of the organization of the two lives. For
on the one hand, it is the brain which is the centre of animal life;
it is to this that all the sensations are referred; it is from it
that all the voluntary motions proceed. On the other hand, by sending
the blood towards all the organs, the heart evidently presides over
the circulation, the secretions, exhalations, nutrition, &c. which
compose by their union organic life. When these two essential bases
exist, nature begins to build, or rather develop around them the double
organized edifice, which produces on the one part a communication
between the animal and external bodies, and on the other nourishes it.

Notwithstanding these early developments, the brain is not like the
heart constantly active; its two great functions, relative to sensation
and motion, are almost nothing. The intellectual functions also have
but a very obscure action, if they have really commenced at all. The
brain is then, if we may so say, in the expectation of action; it
has not acted; it requires the excitement of external bodies. I do
not say, however, that its inactivity is necessarily entire. It can
undoubtedly perceive certain internal motions that take place in the
body, and especially the pains that arise there; for if the organic
diseases can produce the death of the fœtus, why does it not suffer
pain in these diseases? Perhaps the brain is so much the more sensible
to it, as it is not diverted by the external senses. The difference of
the external and internal sensations, is a question that deserves to
be attentively considered. We have seen that the first are uniformly
transmitted by the nerves and that the mode of transmission of the
second is uncertain. On the other hand the phenomena, the sensation,
the impression, &c. are not the same in each; so that an examination of
their relations and their differences is essential. This examination
would have much influence upon the knowledge of the kind of animal life
that the fœtus can enjoy. Whatever it may be, there can be no doubt but
that it is infinitely more contracted than after birth.

The softness of the brain is very great in the fœtus; it is truly a
kind of fluid, that the arteries, or rather the exhalants that arise
from them deposit in their interstices. These arteries are then
extremely numerous; as the brain has a very evident reddish tinge.
When it is cut in slices, numerous streaks of this colour are observed
in its substance. The two portions, the cortical and medullary, are
infinitely less distinct than afterwards, because the second is much
less white. The caustic alkali dissolves them at this period of life
with great ease. The first effect before a complete solution, is to
change the cerebral substance into a glutinous, transparent and viscous
matter, a little reddish however, and ropy, almost like the white of an
egg. I discovered nothing similar to this in my experiments with the
brain of an adult when treated with caustic alkali. The acids coagulate
the cerebral substance of the fœtus, it does not however attain by
them a degree of hardness equal to what they produce in the subsequent
periods of life.

The extreme softness of the brain renders its dissection very difficult
in the fœtus.

The nerves of animal life have a development proportional to that of
the brain. All of them are very large compared to the other parts; thus
the fœtus and the young infant are the most proper for the study of the
nervous system, as the less development of the other systems renders
this more apparent. Their medullary substance is, like the cerebral
and that of the spinal marrow, very soft and even almost liquid under
the finger; in this state we can see it in the anterior part of the
optic, in which it is very evident though contained in the canals
of the nervous coat, in the posterior part of the same nerve, and in
the olfactory where it is found by itself, in the auditory in which
it predominates, and finally at the origin of each pair, where its
proportion to the nervous coat is very evident.

In all the other nerves it is much more difficult to examine well
this medullary substance, because the nervous coat that contains it,
is as much or even more developed in proportion to what it will be
afterwards. Hence it is that the nerves are very hard and resisting
in the fœtus; and that they can support weights proportionably very
great. Maceration in water, at a moderate temperature, increases this
resistance as in the adult, and renders the nerve harder without
increasing its size. We should say that this fluid acts at first upon
the nervous coat, in an opposite manner to what it does upon the other
animal substances; finally it softens it also, and renders it almost
liquid.

The blood vessels are proportionably much larger in the nerves of the
fœtus than in those of the adult. These nerves have in their whitish
colour, a livid tinge that arises from the kind of blood that enters
them; it is the same phenomenon as that of the brain.

The development of the cerebral nerves in the first age presents a
phenomenon which essentially distinguishes it from the development of
the arteries. These last always follow the increase of the parts to
which they go. Thus, the face proportionably less developed in the
fœtus, has less large arteries. It is the same of the viscera of the
pelvis, whose very small arteries receive but little blood, which
does not penetrate and dilate them until the umbilical are closed. On
the contrary, the size of the cerebral, gastric arteries, &c. is very
considerable. The nerves are absolutely independent in their increase,
of that of the parts to which they are distributed. The olfactory,
whose organ is so contracted in the fœtus, has the same proportion as
the optic and the auditory, whose organs are already so much developed.
It is the same of all the nerves of the voluntary muscles; their
proportion of development is uniform, though the muscles vary in their
size, according to the regions. If without regard to these regions, we
examine in a general and comparative manner the nervous, cerebral and
animal muscular systems, we shall see that the first then predominates
manifestly over the second, while in the adult it is the muscles, which
proportionably to what they were in the fœtus, surpass the nerves that
are sent to them. The par vagum which is distributed to organs whose
increase is not in the same relation, presents nevertheless the same
proportion of size as afterwards, in its different branches.

This double opposite arrangement of the two systems the arterial and
nervous cerebral, proves on the one part, the immediate relation of
the first with the increase and nutrition, and on the other the small
influence that the second exercises upon them.

The nerves are, like the brain, principally inactive before birth,
though they have a great development. It is to this that must be
attributed the constant absence of their affections at this period.

The nerves are always found in the fœtus, whereas the brain, and even
the spinal marrow are sometimes wanting; this is what constitutes
acephalic subjects. I shall say elsewhere how the fœtus can thus exist.
I would only remark here that the heart, the liver and the other
principal viscera of organic life, are on the contrary rarely deficient
in the fœtus. Why? Because all the essential organs of this life are
necessary, for growth, vegetation and nourishment, phenomena that can
take place without the cerebral influence which is principally destined
to preside over animal life, which is not particularly in exercise
until birth.


II. _State of the nervous system during growth._

At birth the animal nervous system experiences a remarkable revolution,
in consequence of the red blood that penetrates it. Heretofore black
blood only circulated in its vessels. The sudden difference that the
circulation experiences, has a manifest influence upon its functions.
In fact the least foreign substance, differing from red blood, which
during life is forced towards the brain by the carotid, is sufficient
to produce there a remarkable derangement, and oftentimes even death,
as I have frequently convinced myself. Why? because it is not only as a
vehicle of nutritive matter, that the fluid sent by the arteries acts
upon the brain, but also as an excitant, a stimulant. The change of
excitement which the brain suddenly experiences at birth, inevitably
increases its vital activity, gives it that which is new and renders it
fit for the functions it has never before performed, those of receiving
sensations.

Asphyxia is real always when the lungs are not developed after birth,
when they do not receive air and consequently do not send red blood
to the brain. Some muscular motions may undoubtedly be made; but
animal life never begins in its perfection, until the organs that
execute it are influenced by red blood. This blood is a general cause
of internal excitement. This direct acts simultaneously with the
sympathetic excitement that the brain experiences from the skin and
mucous surfaces, which the external agents act upon immediately after
the exit of the fœtus from the womb. The lungs and the brain influence
each other reciprocally at this period, the first by sending red blood
to the second, and this by putting in action the diaphragm and the
intercostals, which make the air, that is necessary for the production
of this red blood penetrate the lungs; hence we see that other
excitants act before that of this blood, since before its formation,
the brain has already in it a principle of motion.

Besides, the brain and the whole nervous system are the more powerfully
excited by the new principles that the blood has derived from the air,
as, 1st. their vessels are in proportion larger and more numerous than
afterwards; and, 2d. as all the cerebral arteries enter at that part
of the base of the brain, where is found the origin of the nerves, and
which is without doubt the most sensitive part of the whole organ.

There is certainly a very great difference between asphyxia that
happens to an adult, and the state in which the fœtus is found, since,
if the first is prolonged, organic life ceases, while this life is
in full activity in the fœtus. Thus there is no resemblance in the
composition of the black blood in the arteries in asphyxia and that in
the arteries of the fœtus. These two states, however, have a sort of
analogy, especially under the relation of the remarkable diminution,
of even the absence of animal life, which characterize both. Now in
producing asphyxia in an animal at will, by fixing a stop-cock upon
the wind-pipe, I have always observed that this life is annihilated
when the black blood penetrates the brain, and that when it is in part
suspended, it suddenly revives and re-appears by opening the stop-cock,
and permitting red blood to enter the brain, nerves, and all the parts.
These experiments can, then, to a certain point, give us an idea of the
part the red blood takes at birth, in the development of animal life; I
say the part, for it is not, as we shall see, the only cause that puts
it in action.

For a long time after birth and during the whole of the growth, the
nervous system and the brain, which is the centre of it, predominate
in their development over the other systems; this predominance is not
uniform at all the periods; it diminishes at puberty, when the nervous
system is in equilibrium with the others, and the genital organs
succeed it in superiority.

This predominance of the nervous system in the infant has an influence
on the one hand on the sensations, on the other upon the voluntary
motions.

The first influence is very striking. Infancy is the age of sensations.
As every thing is new to the infant, every thing attracts its eyes,
ears, nostrils, &c. That which to us is an object of indifference, is
to it a source of pleasures. As a man receives great enjoyment from
a show he never witnessed before, which is blunted by habit if often
repeated. It was then necessary that the nervous cerebral system
should be adapted, by its early development, to the great degree of
action which it is then to have. In fact, all the organs that receive
external impressions, the nerves that transmit them, and the brain
that perceives them, are really in the infant when awake in permanent
excitement, who in the midst of the same objects as the adult, fatigues
these organs three times as much as he to whom a great part of these
external objects is indifferent, because they have heretofore excited
him. Thus observe that the periods of activity of animal life are much
shorter in the infant who fatigues his organs in a few hours, in whom,
consequently, the want of sleep returns oftener, and in whom this
state of intermission of animal life is more profound. It is rare that
infants, in the first months, can pass the whole day awake, especially
if many objects engage them. We might prolong their wakefulness by
removing them from light, sounds, &c.

The multiplicity and frequency of the sensations of the infant, lead
necessarily to a number of motions which have not strength, because
of the weakness of the muscles, but which are, like the sensations,
extremely numerous. As the sight incessantly presents new objects to
the infant, it wishes constantly to touch; its little hands are in
continual agitation, its whole body is also in constant motion. It
is necessary that the nerves which serve to transmit the principle of
these motions, should be adapted by their development, like those of
the sensations, to their constant action.

These two things, the great development of the nervous system and the
frequency of its action in the infant, make the diseases of this system
the predominant ones at that age. So great is the susceptibility of the
brain in answering to sympathetic excitements, that if pains are at all
severe in any part, they immediately produce convulsions, which are at
least four times more frequent at this age than any of the following. I
would observe upon this subject, that the different systems are more or
less disposed in the different ages, to answer to sympathies, according
as their predominance in the economy is more or less decided. The same
morbific cause, fixed upon any organ, which produces convulsions in
an infant by acting sympathetically upon the brain, would give to a
young girl a suppression of the catamenia, by influencing the womb,
which then begins to predominate; to a strong vigorous young man, a
peripneumony; to an adult, in whom the gastric viscera predominate, an
affection of these viscera, &c. It is thus that the same passions that
would give to this one a jaundice, engorgement of the liver, &c. would
produce more particularly in an infant an epilepsy, which attacks the
brain.

The nervous functions are not only frequently deranged by sympathy in
infancy, but it is particularly at this age that the greatest number of
organic diseases is found in the brain, the spinal marrow, the nerves,
or the organs that depend upon them. Cerebral fungi, hydrocephalus,
spina bifida, &c. are a proof of this. The great quantity of blood that
goes at that period to the nervous system has much influence upon this
phenomenon; now this quantity is brought there by the predominance of
the vital forces.

In proportion as the infant grows, its nervous system and the brain,
which is the centre of it, lose by degrees the predominance that
characterize them. Their diseases become less frequent. They are
brought finally to the level of the other systems.


III. _State of the nervous system after growth._

At puberty, the empire of the brain, which is insensibly diminished,
gives place to that of the genital organs, which have a sudden
increase. The cerebral nerves appear to me to have but little influence
upon their development, as well as upon that of most of the other
systems. Observe, in fact, that all the phenomena of generation are
governed by the organic forces, which, as we have seen, are absolutely
independent of the nerves. Thus the great excitement of the genital
organs, from which arise satyriasis, nymphomania, &c. have no analogy
with convulsions whose principle is in the brain; as the destruction
of the venereal appetite is wholly disconnected with the phenomena of
palsies. This is so true, that often during those that affect the lower
half of the body by a fall on the sacrum, or by any other cause, the
secretion of semen and venereal desires take place as usual.

Beyond puberty, and towards the adult age, when the general equilibrium
is more nearly established among the different systems, the nervous is
not affected more than those of which we have had occasion to speak in
treating of this system.


IV. _State of the nervous system in old age._

At this period of life, the nervous cerebral system has but very few
functions to perform. As to sensation, this being almost blunted by
habit, is the reason why external bodies make but little impression
upon the organs of sense; many of these, especially the eye and the
ear, are often shut to sensations before general death. The nerves
have then but little to transmit, and the brain but little to perceive.
As to motion, there is but little in old age, because but little is
felt; for feeling and motion are two things that generally follow the
same proportion. The brain and the nerves are almost inactive in this
respect. The first is not put in action by the intellectual functions;
memory, imagination, judgment, attention, &c. all are enfeebled, none
are exerted with clearness.

Changes of structure constantly accord with these changes of functions.
In the fœtus, the brain is almost fluid; in old age, it is extremely
firm. This organ has passed through a variety of gradations between the
two extreme ages. We know that anatomists always select the brain of an
old person in order to study this viscus, all the parts of which are
broken with difficulty. I would observe upon this subject, that what is
natural at this age, indicates in a young person a morbid alteration.
In general, we have not yet sufficiently studied the comparative
anatomy of the different ages, to make applications of it to the
examination of dead bodies.

The vessels diminish in the brain in proportion as its hardness
increases. In this respect it has an inverse arrangement at the two
extreme ages of life. Its colour becomes more dull in old age. It is
rare that it is ossified; there are, however, some examples of it. The
phenomena, that the action of different re-agents presents, are very
much slower in taking place than in the adult and especially in the
infant. The solution by alkalies is a remarkable proof of this.

We cannot doubt but that this organic state of the brain in old age,
has much influence upon the preceding phenomena; to this must be
referred the less acuteness of pain at this age. A cancerous tumour
of an old person, exactly analogous in its position, form, size and
nature to that of an adult, produces much less suffering. Cancers of
the womb, the stomach, the breast, &c. furnish examples of this. All
the local causes of pain show also the same thing. In the numerous
experiments I have made upon living animals, I have uniformly observed,
that young ones, when the sensible parts are cut, give signs of the
most acute pain; whilst old ones show infinitely less expression of it
under similar circumstances. I would make one other remark upon this
subject; it is that the variety appears in dogs, in a certain degree to
have an influence upon the acuteness of their sensations. All the large
varieties make but little noise, and are not much agitated, when their
skin, their nerves, &c. are cut; whilst all the small ones, though they
may be old, struggle, are agitated, and manifest upon the slightest
cause, the most acute sensibility.

As to the influence of age upon pain, it is not astonishing that the
animal sensibility having become very obscure in a natural state,
should preserve the same character in disease. An old person suffers
then much less than the adult, and especially than the infant, under
the influence of the same causes; it is a compensation for the
diminution of their enjoyments. The infant finds in every thing that
surrounds him, a cause of pleasure or of pain; thus smiles and tears
succeed each other a hundred times a day upon his little face. An old
person on the contrary is always calm; indifference is his natural
state.

The nerves experience the same changes as the brain; they harden
gradually with age; however their proportion of hardness in the
first and last ages is much less remarkable than that of this organ;
this arises from the nervous coat; for the effect upon the medullary
substance appears to be the same. This medullary substance has appeared
to me to be less abundant in the optic nerve of an old person; however
it is difficult to determine the quantity. The colour of the nerves
becomes dull, like that of the brain. They receive fewer vessels. They
are never ossified.

Sometimes we say that the extremities of the nerves have become
callous; it is a vague expression, to which no meaning can be attached.
When will medical language cease to refer to the empty and inaccurate
hypotheses that formerly constituted medicine? Most of these hypotheses
have passed away, yet the names to which they gave birth remain.

The nervous system and the brain frequently lose beforehand, in old
people, a part of their functions; hence hemiplegia is almost as
frequent at that age, as convulsions which are its opposite, are in
infancy. It is necessary to distinguish the hemiplegias of old people
from those of adults. They are of the same nature as the blindness,
the deafness of old people; the difference is only in the injury of
sensation or motion.




NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.


GENERAL REMARKS.

No anatomist has yet considered the nervous system of the ganglions
in the point of view in which I shall present it. This point of view
consists in describing each ganglion as a distinct centre, independent
of the others in its action, furnishing or receiving particular nerves
as the brain furnishes or receives its own, having nothing in common,
except by anastomoses, with the other analogous organs; so that there
is this remarkable difference between the nervous system of animal
life, and that of organic life, viz. that the first has a single
centre, and that it is to the brain that every kind of sensation comes,
and that it is from it every kind of motion goes; whilst in the second,
there are as many little separate centres, and consequently little
secondary nervous systems, as there are ganglions.

We know that all anatomists, even those who, without affixing to
the expression any very definite meaning, have called the ganglions
little brains, have taken them for dependancies, for enlargements
of the nerves, in whose course they are found; and as most of them
are met with in the great sympathetic, they have presented them as
a distinctive character of this nerve. But from the general idea I
have just given of the ganglions, it is evident that this nerve has
no real existence, and that the continuous thread that is observed
from the neck to the pelvis, is nothing but a succession of nervous
communications, a series of branches that the ganglions placed above
each other, send reciprocally to each other, and not a nerve going from
the brain or the spine.

The first considerations that induced me to think that the great
sympathetic is not a nerve like the others, but a series of
anastomoses, were the following. 1st. These communications are often
interrupted, without any inconvenience, in the organs to which the
great sympathetic goes. There are subjects, for example, in whom is
found a very distinct interval between the pectoral and lumbar portions
of this pretended nerve, which seems cut in this place, because the
last pectoral ganglion and the first lumbar do not send branches to
each other. I have often seen also the sympathetic nerve cease, and
afterwards appear again between two ganglions and from the same cause,
whether in the loins, or in the sacral region. 2d. Every one knows
that the opthalmic ganglion, the spheno-palatine, &c. are constantly
distinct, and that they do not communicate by their branches except
with the cerebral nerves. It uniformly happens that there is between
them and those of the great sympathetic, what we sometimes see between
these last, viz. a complete deficiency of communication. 3d. In birds,
as has been observed by Cuvier, the superior cervical ganglion is also
found constantly distinct; it never communicates with the inferior.
The filament which in quadrupeds descends the length of the neck, is
wanting in them. In many other animals we frequently find interruptions
in this succession of anastomoses of ganglions, which constitute
what is called the great sympathetic. 4th. The communications of the
ganglions are usually made by a single branch; but sometimes many go
from one of these organs to the other, so that if the great sympathetic
was a nerve like the others, it would present, in this respect, an
arrangement wholly different from that of the cerebral nervous system.
5th. Whence does the great sympathetic arise? From the sixth pair? But
all the nerves diminish as they go from the brain towards the organs;
but this presents then an arrangement entirely different; it increases
as it sends off branches. Does it arise from the spinal marrow? But
then the branches with which it furnishes a region would come from the
branches that it receives from the spinal marrow in this region. Thus
the great and small splanchnic would arise from certain intercostal
pairs, now they are evidently much larger, the first especially, than
the sum of the branches from which they would derive their origin.
Observe then that all anatomists have been of a different opinion upon
the origin of the great sympathetic. How could they agree upon a thing
that has no real existence?

These different considerations render probable the opinion that I have
entertained for some time, that the great sympathetic nerve does not
really exist, that this cord is but a succession of communications
between little nervous systems placed above each other, and that it
is not essential that these communications should exist, as is seen
constantly between the ophthalmic ganglion and the spheno-palatine,
between that and the superior cervical, of which many animals furnish
examples. Then I began to regard each ganglion as a separate centre
of a little nervous system, wholly different from the cerebral, and
distinct even from the little nervous systems of the other ganglions.
By considering the functions of the nerves going from these centres, I
became more and more convinced that they did not belong to the cerebral
system. In fact, these nerves have properties very different from
theirs, as we shall see; they do not serve for sensations; they have
uniformly no connexion with voluntary locomotion; we see them only in
the organs of internal life; hence why they are found concentrated in
the trunk, in the thorax and abdomen particularly; why they are not
met with in the head, where almost all the organs belong to animal
life; why they are not seen in the extremities, which are exclusively
dependant upon this life.

Distributed almost every where to the organs of the internal life,
the ganglions and their nerves derive their character from it; and
this is it. 1st. They are not symmetrical; thus the nerves of all the
plexuses of the abdomen, those of the cardiacs, &c. have a remarkable
irregularity. 2d. There are numberless varieties in the form of these
plexuses and in that of the ganglions; it is thus that, sometimes
lenticular, sometimes triangular, sometimes divided into many portions,
that which is under the diaphragm is never seen twice alike. Hence
the error of every name derived from the figure; a remark that is
applicable generally to the organs of internal life. We might rather
borrow the names of forms for animal life in which these forms are more
invariable. On the other hand, the existence of many ganglions varies;
sometimes there are three of them in the neck, at others but two. The
arrangement of one side does not produce a similar one on the other.
I have frequently remarked that the number of filaments arising from
the superior cervical ganglion differs very much from those that take
their origin from the opposite side. There are two analogous organs
at each side; but several attributes of structure destroy the general
character of symmetry; it is like the lungs and the kidnies. We can,
then, establish as a distinctive character between the two nervous
systems, the symmetry of one and the irregularity of the other; now,
this character is one of those which distinguish the two lives, as I
have remarked before.

From all this it is evident that a line of demarcation separates the
nerves of the ganglions and those of the brain, and that the method
is inaccurate which considers them as forming a single nerve, arising
by some origin from this last. Their communications no more prove it
to be a general nerve, than the branches which pass from each of the
cervical, lumbar, or sacral pairs, to the two pairs that are superior
or inferior to it. Notwithstanding these communications, we consider
each pair in a separate manner, and not as one nerve by their union. So
that each ganglion should be described separately, notwithstanding the
branches it sends to others.

The description of the system of the ganglions should be analogous
to that of the cerebral nerves. For example, I describe first the
lenticular ganglion, as was done for the brain; then I examine its
branches, among which is found the great splanchnic; for it is very
improper to say that this nerve gives origin to this ganglion. The same
in the neck, in the head, &c. each ganglion is first described; then I
treat of its branches, among which are found those of communication.
There are, then, almost as many descriptions as there are separate
ganglions. For example, we ought not to treat of the ophthalmic nerve
with the common motor; to be convinced of this, it is sufficient to see
how much the ciliary nerves differ from the others, which, belonging to
animal life, are also contained in the orbit.

From all that has been said, it is evident that there are two things to
be examined in the nervous system of organic life, 1st. the ganglions;
2d. the nerves that go from them.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE GANGLIONS.


I. _Situation, forms, relations, &c._

The ganglions are little reddish or greyish bodies, situated in
different parts of the body, and forming so many centres, from which
goes an infinite number of nervous ramifications. Their position most
generally is along the vertebral column, where are seen successively
below each other, the superior and inferior cervical, the intercostal,
the lumbar, and the sacral. It is these especially whose communicating
branches form the great sympathetic. But besides these ganglions, which
are placed as it were in a row, we find many separate ones in different
parts, as the ophthalmics, the sphenopalatines, the maxillaries in the
head, as also the semilunars in the abdomen. In the thorax there are
none thus separate; though sometimes we see a small one at the base of
the heart.

Besides the ganglions uniformly seen, there are often accidental
ones, if we may so say; such are those that are sometimes found in
the hypogastric plexus, in the solar even, at some distance from the
semilunar, in the middle part of the neck, &c. On the other hand, some
of those that are usually met with are oftentimes not found, as some of
the lumbar, sacral, maxillary, &c.; so that it appears that there is
really an essential difference between the ganglions under the relation
of existence. The superior cervical, the semilunar, the ophthalmic, &c.
are always found; they appear to be essentially necessary to the action
of the organs to which they furnish nerves. Most of the others may be
wanting on the contrary, and be supplied by those of the neighbouring
ones, or by others formed not in the ordinary anatomical order.

All the ganglions are generally in a deep situation. Destitute of
a bony covering analogous to that of the brain, they are not less
powerfully protected against the action of external bodies. It is this
deep position, that prevents us from making experiments upon almost
all of them, from making those at least which require that the animal
should live a certain time after they have been made. It is this which
will undoubtedly keep up for a length of time the obscurity that hangs
over the functions of these organs.

The form of the ganglions is extremely irregular. In general they are
round; but sometimes they are long, as the superior cervical; sometimes
the ganglion is a species of triangular body, with obtuse and round
ends, as the ophthalmic; sometimes the form is semilunar, like that
which has this name, &c. Generally these forms are very variable, as I
have said; the most uniform is that of the superior cervical.

Embedded in a quantity of cellular texture, all the ganglions are
separated by it from the neighbouring organs. Almost all of them
are so disposed, that they experience but little motion from these
organs, and cannot receive it from any of the vessels that enter them.
Those situated along the vertebral column especially, present this
phenomenon, very different from that which takes place at the brain,
whose functions are essentially connected with the constant agitation
that the blood imparts to it, and very different from that which we
observe in the plexuses of nerves coming from these same ganglions.


II. _Organization._

The ganglions have generally in the adult a reddish colour very
different from that of the nerves; sometimes they are greyish. When
opened, they present a soft, spongy texture, resembling considerably at
first view that of the pretended lymphatic glands.

This texture has nothing in common with the cerebral substance, nor
with that which occupies the canal of the nervous coat. These two
last should rather be ranked in the class of fluids, as I have said;
their substance is a pulp, a real jelly. Thus they have not any of
the properties of solids. They do not harden like horn; the kind of
hardening, the result of the contact of alkohol, of the acids, and of
caloric, is wholly different from the horny hardening. It is analogous
to the hardening of the white of an egg. On the contrary, the texture
of the ganglions hardens like horn in an evident manner, a phenomenon
which is characteristic of all the solids, except the epidermis, the
nails, and the hair, which make a separate class. Treated by the acids,
the ganglions, after wrinkling, hardening like horn and hardening
gradually, soften and become fluid.

Boiling produces a phenomenon nearly analogous; 1st. horny hardening
and hardening at the instant the water boils; 2d. continuance of this
state for half an hour; 3d. softening gradually brought on; when this
last is complete, the effect of the boiling is finished. In this state,
the ganglions are all different from the nerves submitted to the
same experiment. I have observed also in veal, that they have a very
different taste from that of the nerves, a method of research which
should not be neglected in attempting to ascertain the difference of
the nature of the organs. In fact, as we do not yet know the difference
of the principles which enter into the composition of each, we should
be satisfied with the difference of the qualities.

The alkalies act a little upon the ganglions, which they tend to
dissolve, and which they do partly dissolve, if they are very caustic.
But this solution is infinitely less prompt and less easy than that
of the cerebral pulp by the same re-agents. The ganglions resist
putrefaction as much and even more than the nerves; this forms also a
very remarkable difference between them and the cerebral substance. In
general, we cannot establish any kind of analogy between them.

The texture of the ganglions appears in nowise fibrous; there is
absolutely no linear, filamentous appearance, &c. upon simple
inspection. Homogeneous, if we may so say, in its nature, it presents
every where an uniform aspect when cut in slices. However the
celebrated Scarpa has considered the ganglions as resulting from a
kind of expansion of the nerves, into an infinite number of extremely
delicate fibres, which interlace with each other, and which become
very distinct by maceration. I have not repeated all his experiments,
which appear to me extremely difficult. I refer then to his work, and
to the plates it contains. I would observe only that there is certainly
something else in the ganglions, besides a simple division of the nerve
into extremely fine threads. In fact, mere inspection is sufficient to
establish between them the greatest difference. There is as evident a
demarcation between the ganglions and the nerves, as between those of
the brain and the brain itself. 1st. Difference of colour, reddish or
greyish tinge in some, white in others; 2d. difference of consistence,
of external qualities, &c.; 3d. difference of properties. If the nerves
coming from the spinal marrow make only an expansion, in their passage,
in the ganglions, by delicate filaments, there would then be only a
difference of form and not of nature; the properties would be the same.
Why then are they so different as I shall prove hereafter? Why, as a
nerve goes from a ganglion, does it not communicate more voluntary
motions? 4th. Why has not nature placed ganglions in the nerves of the
extremities as in those of the other parts? If there is only a division
of the nerve into finer filaments, in the ganglion, why is there not a
proportion between the filaments that enter on one side, and those that
go out at the opposite? In fact, those that enter into the superior
cervical above, if they only expanded their filaments in this ganglion,
and united afterwards to form those that go off below, would be equal
in respect to size to those that go from it; all the ganglions would
exhibit this constant relation between the nerves of one side and those
of the opposite; now, it is sufficient to examine them to be convinced
that an inverse arrangement exists. 6th. The ganglions ought always to
be in proportion to the size of the nerves which form them by spreading
their fibres. Why then are the intercostal ganglions so small, and the
trunks that unite them, or rather that give origin to them and which
go from them afterwards as we see in the usual manner, so large? Why
on the contrary, is the superior cervical ganglion so large, and its
branches so small? 7th. How can be explained the frequent interruptions
between the ganglions in man, which are constant in many animals, if
there is a continuity between the nervous filaments that enter the
ganglions above, and those that go from them below? 8th. How does it
happen that the ganglions and their nerves do not follow an exact
proportion as to development with the cerebral nerves, if these form
them by expanding? 9th. Why has not pain the same character in each
species of nerves?

I have no opinion as to the nature or the functions of the ganglions,
because I have no fact to support me; but there is certainly something
more in their texture, than a mere expansion of nervous filaments.
Scarpa admits a peculiar matter which separates these filaments; but
this substance ought to predominate considerably, as the ganglion
surpasses in size the nerves which are thought to give origin to it.
Now I have never seen this substance; I do not know what it is; all is
solid when the ganglion is cut. I think then by admitting, even to a
certain extent, the internal arrangement that this author has observed
in the ganglions, we cannot describe these organs in the point of view
in which he has presented them.

We know but little of the alterations that diseases produce in the
texture of the ganglions. I have already many times examined in
diseases of the heart, of the liver, of the stomach, the intestines,
the ganglions that send nerves to these viscera; they have never
appeared to me to have undergone any change. In cancers of the stomach
in the very last stage, in which all the cellular texture is engorged,
and in which all the lymphatic glands are considerably swelled, I have
always found the semi-lunar ganglion untouched, except however in one
case where it was enlarged and its density a little increased. At
another time I found this same ganglion of the size of a small nut,
with a cartilaginous substance in its centre, resembling the stone
of it, in the body of a man brought to the Hôtel Dieu on account of
periodical mania. Some authors have thought, and I suspect the same
thing also, that the hysteric paroxysms, which begin by a contraction
at the epigastric region, and in which the patient feels a ball mount
up even to the throat, arise from some affections of the semi-lunar
ganglions, from the solar plexus and the communications which go from
ganglion to ganglion, even to the neck. However two bodies that I have
opened lately, exhibited no alteration, though during life the subjects
had been frequently attacked with these paroxysms; but they may arise
evidently from the ganglions and the epigastric plexuses, without their
being altered in their structure, as a number of cerebral affections
leave after them no trace in the brain. This point deserves particular
examination.

It does not appear that the texture of the ganglions is surrounded
by a peculiar membrane. The cellular texture is only condensed in
their neighbourhood; it then becomes very consistent, and much
contracted around them. It there has the nature of the sub-mucous,
the sub-arterial textures, &c.; it never contains fat. There is then
truly around the ganglions, as around the arteries, under the mucous
surfaces, &c. the two kinds of cellular texture of which we have
spoken in treating of the organization of this texture, and which
differ so essentially from each other in their nature, and even in
their properties. It is the second kind, which is analogous to the
sub-arterial texture, &c. which forms the peculiar membrane admitted by
some authors.

By examining attentively the interior of the ganglions, we see that
there is but very little cellular texture there. I have found this
texture constantly destitute of fat; thus the alkalies do not form a
saponaceous deposit upon them, as upon the cerebral nerves when plunged
in their solution. I have examined many ganglions in this way, on
account of the opinion of Scarpa, who believes that these organs are
penetrated with this fluid, at least in fat people.

The ganglions receive many blood vessels. These penetrate them from
all sides, run first in a kind of cellular covering that surrounds
them, then entering their texture, ramify and are lost there in
numerous anastomoses, and in continuation with the exhalants that carry
nutritive matter. Fine injections show a great quantity of vessels in
these little organs. Nutrition supposes exhalants and absorbents there.


III. _Properties._

It is difficult to analyze the properties of texture in the ganglions.
As to vital properties, they cannot grow, live and be nourished
without organic sensibility, and without insensible contractility
of the same kind. Animal and sensible organic contractility do not
exist there evidently. As to animal sensibility I have observed the
following circumstance. As in opening the abdomen of an animal, of a
dog, for example, he lives very well for some time, and remains even
calm after the first moments of suffering; I have waited for this calm
that succeeds the agitation arising from the incision of the abdominal
parietes, then laid the semi-lunar ganglion bare, and irritated it
powerfully; the animal is not agitated, whilst when I excite a cerebral
lumbar nerve, for comparison, he cries out, raises himself up and
struggles. In general it appears that the sensibility of the ganglions
is infinitely less evident than that of many other organs. Certainly
the skin, the mucous system, the medullary, the nervous of animal life,
&c. surpass it in this respect.

Our ignorance as to the diseases that have their seat in the ganglions,
the distance of those organs from external excitement, prevent our
having any data as to their sympathies. I think it very probable,
however, that these sympathies take a real part in hysteria, in
certain kinds of epilepsy, the paroxysms of which begin, like those
of hysteria, by a painful sensation at the epigastric region, in
that multitude of affections called nervous, and which the vulgar
confound under the name of vapours. One of the most important objects
of research in the neuroses, is to determine those that have their
particular seat in the nervous cerebral system and those which
affect more particularly the system of the ganglions. Place on one
side, palsy, hemiplegia, convulsions of infants, tetanus, catalepsy,
apoplexy, the greatest part of epilepsies, all the numerous accidents
that arise from engorgements, from compressions of the brain from
wounds of the head, nervous affections of the sight, hearing, taste,
smell, &c. and all the diseases the source of which is evidently in
the head; on the other place hysteria, hypochondriasis, melancholia
and all that numerous class of affections in which the abdomen and the
thorax, the first especially, seem to be the spot in which the evil is
seated; you will see that there is an essential difference and that
the symptoms have entirely a different character. I do not say that
the last kind of nervous diseases affect exclusively the ganglions;
for too much obscurity hangs over these affections to pronounce any
thing positive as to their seat, or their nature. Undoubtedly even the
secretory, circulating, pulmonary organs, &c. can be then particularly
affected in their peculiar texture and independently of the nerves they
receive; but certainly it is an interesting subject of research, and
there is too great a difference in the phenomena of the two orders of
affections, not to present differences in their primitive seat. It is
difficult to conceive that the system of the ganglions has not a great
part in the last order.

That which induces me to think that the difference of the phenomena
that the general order of neuroses presents us, arises particularly
from the difference of the cerebral nerves and of those of the
ganglions, is that their phenomena in a state of health are very
different. Hallé has observed very well that the pains that are
experienced in the parts in which the nerves coming from the ganglions
are distributed, have a peculiar character, and that they do not
resemble those that are felt in the parts where the cerebral nerves
are sent. Thus the painful sensation that is experienced at the loins
in affections of the womb, by vinous injection made into the tunica
vaginalis, &c. a sensation that appears to me to arise from the
sympathetic influence exercised by the organ affected upon the lumbar
ganglions, the pains of the intestines, the burnings at the epigastric
region, &c. &c. do not resemble pains of the external parts; they are
deep, and go to the heart, as we often say. We know that there are
colics essentially nervous, which are certainly independent of every
local affection of the serous, mucous, and muscular systems of the
intestines. These colics are evidently seated in the nerves of the
semi-lunar ganglions, which are spread along the whole course of the
abdominal arteries. They are real neuralgias of the nervous system of
organic life; now these neuralgias have absolutely nothing in common
with the tic douloureux, sciatica, and other neuralgias of the nervous
system of animal life. The symptoms, the progress, the duration, &c.
every thing is different in these two kinds of affections.

What I have just said upon the injuries of sensation, applies also
to those of motion. No kind of comparison can be made between the
convulsions of the muscles that receive the nerves of animal life, and
the spasmodic and irregular motions which arise in all the muscles that
receive nerves from the ganglions. Nothing resembles tetanus in the
heart, the intestines, the bladder, &c.

All these considerations establish striking differences between the
cerebral nerves and those of the ganglions; differences upon which I
can only present approximations, as we have no data as to the functions
of the last.


IV. _Development._

The ganglions differ essentially from the brain in the early periods
in their development, which is proportionably much less advanced than
that of the brain. They are only on a level with all the other organs,
whilst this is infinitely superior to them in this respect, as we
have seen. By comparing the superior cervical, semilunar ganglions,
&c. in the fœtus, and in the adult, it is easy to make this remark.
The ganglions receive also less vessels in proportion than the brain.
They do not follow the proportion of increase of the organs to which
they send nerves. Thus those that furnish the genital organs, which
are nearly nothing during the first years of general nutrition, are as
large in proportion as those which go to the liver, the stomach, the
intestines, which are characterized by an early increase. These nerves
follow in this respect the same law as the ganglions, though the most
are found upon the arteries, which are more or less developed according
to the organs they penetrate.

The nervous system of organic life being less early in its development
than that of animal life, should be subject in infancy to fewer
affections; and this is what is observed. Convulsions, and most of the
neuroses of the second, are, as we have seen, a peculiar appendage
upon infancy. On the other hand, the particular order of nervous
affections of which we have spoken, and in which it appears that the
first takes the principal part, is generally less frequent at this
period. All nervous diseases, whose peculiar seat seems to be at the
epigastric region, in which there is so great an abundance of nerves
coming from the ganglions, appear to be foreign to this age.

Another difference that distinguishes the ganglions from the brain as
it respects development, is this, that in the fœtus, they are not, like
it, of extreme softness. Their hardness is little inferior to what they
afterwards possess in adult age.

In proportion as we advance from infancy, the organic nervous system
begins to become predominant. It is towards the thirtieth or fortieth
year that it appears at its maximum of action; it diminishes as we
approach old age; it decays in part at this epoch. The nerves become
greyish; the ganglions are hard, resisting and smaller. The neuroses
that appear to belong to them are infinitely more rare. Moreover, the
obscurity that rests upon the functions of this system, does not allow
me to point out definitely the alterations they experience in the
different ages.


V. _Remarks upon the vertebral ganglions._

In all that I have said thus far upon the ganglions, I have not noticed
those which correspond with the foramina through which the nerves pass,
and which some call simple ganglions. We know that at the instant
each nerve goes from each of these foramina, it exhibits an evident
enlargement, reddish, pulpy, analogous in its appearance to most of
the ganglions. I confess, that I know not how to class these organs.
We cannot deny that they have the greatest analogy in structure to the
others. They are approximated in another respect, which is this, that
the nerves, in going from them, form almost immediately plexuses that
we have designated under the names of cervical, brachial, lumbar, and
sacral, in the same way as the solar, cardiac, mesenteric plexuses, &c.
are formed by the nerves of organic life, at the moment they go from
their respective ganglions. However, these last nerves are conductors
of very different properties. Irritate in a living animal the superior
cervical ganglion, the inferior even, which is more difficult, though
it may be come at, the muscles to which they send nerves will remain
unmoved; the same phenomenon takes place by exciting the nerves
themselves. On the contrary, every irritation of a filament coming
from the vertebral ganglions, produces immediately convulsions in the
corresponding muscles. The sensibility is entirely different in the two
species of nerves. Besides, there is no analogy between the manner in
which the nerves go in all directions from the vertebral ganglions, and
that in which the other ganglions furnish theirs. In the expectation
that further experiments may elucidate the subject, let us content
ourselves with pointing out what is the result of accurate observation.


ARTICLE SECOND.

OF THE NERVES OF ORGANIC LIFE.


I. _Origin._

Each ganglion is, as we have seen, a centre from which go in different
directions, various branches, the whole of which form a kind of little
separate nervous system. The manner of the origin of these branches has
but very little relation with that of the branches of the brain and of
the spinal marrow. The following are some differences that distinguish
it.

1st. The adhesion is much stronger; the nerve breaks any where else
rather than at its origin; the opposite of this takes place in the
preceding system. 2d. It does not appear that the substance of the
ganglion is continued in the nerve to form the medullary substance of
it, since the organization of the one and the other is very different.
Sometimes, however, the ganglion is continued for a short distance in
the form of a cord. This happens especially in the superior cervical,
in the lumbar, the semi-lunar, &c. Then the form only is different; but
it is easy at the first view to distinguish where the ganglion ends
and the nerve begins. 3d. This beginning is made in a sudden manner;
it is like a muscle implanted in a tendon. The best manner of seeing
this arrangement to advantage is to cut longitudinally the superior
cervical ganglion and the cord it sends to the inferior; the change
of nature of the one and the other is then very apparent; or, if we
consider the ganglion as a division of the numerous filaments of the
nervous cords, we distinguish very well the sudden change that these
filaments experience in passing from the cord to the nerve. 4th. The
dense cellular covering that surrounds the ganglion is continued upon
the nervous origin, and gives it an increase of consistence at that
place. This must be carefully raised before we come to the nerve. We
see then each distinct filament arising from the ganglion. After it has
gone from it, sometimes it remains separate; this takes place at the
semi-lunar, the lumbar, the opthalmic, whose elongations are of great
delicacy. Sometimes many of these filaments unite together and form a
cord as between the two cervical, as at the great and small splanchnic
nerves, &c.

I have not been able by maceration, ebullition, or the action of the
acids to destroy the adhesion of the nerve with the ganglion, as we
destroy that of the muscle with the tendon, of this with the bone, &c.


II. _Course, Termination, Plexuses._

The nerves after going from the ganglions, are distributed in many
different ways which we shall now examine.

1st. There are always some which go immediately to communicate with
the system of animal life. The ophthalmic ganglion sends branches to
the motores communes, and to the nasal nerve. The spheno-palatine
communicates with the superior maxillary nerve; the superior cervical
with all the nerves that surround it, viz. above with the motor
externus, within with the great hypoglossal, the par vagum, the
glosso-pharyngeal, the spinal, &c.; behind with the first cervical
pairs. All the ganglions situated above each other along the vertebral
column, send communications through each pair of foramina that
correspond with them. The par vagum communicates with the semi-lunar,
&c. It is not then any separate ganglion of the nerves of animal
life; hence the common expression that designates each ganglion as
arising from this or that pair, or being found in its course, is very
inaccurate. Thus the opthalmic is by no means in the course of the
common motor nerve. The one and the other send each a branch, which
unites; or rather there is a branch of communication between the
ganglion and the cerebral nerve. In general all these branches of
communication with the system of animal life, are short, whitish, and
of the same nature, or at least of the same appearance as the nerves of
this last. They do not form any plexus in their course, rarely furnish
branches, and appear to have no other use than that of establishing
anastomoses between the two systems.

2d. Each ganglion sends above and below branches to the two ganglions
that are contiguous to it. We have seen that the opthalmic and the
spheno-palatine are exceptions to this rule. Sometimes also, as I
have said, there are interruptions in other regions. Notwithstanding
this, these general communications make us regard the ganglions as
being connected every where, and able to receive from each other the
different affections of which they can be primitively the separate
seat. These branches of communication are straight as in the preceding,
sometimes very fine, as between the lumbar and sacral ganglions, at
other times larger, as that which is between the two cervical, superior
and inferior, in some cases very large, as the great splanchnic,
which is a real trunk of communication between the intercostals and
the semi-lunar. The nerves that we are now considering, the last
especially, have like the preceding, an arrangement exactly analogous
to the cerebral nerves; they are formed of whitish cords, which are the
result of filaments. The eye discovers no difference between them.

3d. Many filaments coming from ganglions, go to certain cerebral
muscles, as to the diaphragm, some of those of the neck, &c.; others go
to neighbouring organs only.

4th. The greatest number going from the ganglions in separate
filaments, interlace in the form of a plexus with those of the
contiguous ganglions, in the neighbourhood of, or upon the great
vessels. The most remarkable plexus is the solar, composed by the
innumerable branches that come from the semi-lunar; then we see the
hypogastric, the cardiac, &c. The greater number of these plexuses are
not exclusively formed by the nerves of organic life; those of the
animal give some to them also, as the par vagum furnishes an example
for the solar and the cardiac, as the sacral nerves afford another
for the hypogastric, &c. However the nerves of organic life always
predominate in these plexuses. There is only the pulmonary in which the
par vagum particularly predominates, whilst the nerves coming from the
inferior cervical ganglion are, if we may so say, but accessory.

The primitive plexuses resulting from the interlacing of the organic
nerves at their exit from the ganglions, form a mass of irregular
nerves, buried in the cellular texture, accommodated to the forms of
the neighbouring organs, and wholly different from those of animal
life, as of the brachial, the lumbar, &c.

In fact, the filaments at every instant, not only place themselves as
in the preceding ones, at the side of each other, at every change of
position; but their extremities continue; they interlace with each
other, change at every point the direction, form networks, and mix so
together, that it is not possible to distinguish any thing except a
thousand nerves, that we might say grew up under the cloth with which
we wiped the place where the plexus was found.

These organs are remarkable for their reddish or greyish colour, for
their softness, for their indistinctness, &c.; it is often difficult
to distinguish them from cellular texture. The best manner of making
them evident is to let the subject macerate for a day or two open in
the water; they whiten then sensibly, do not soften, and appear even to
increase in consistence, like the cerebral nerves in a similar case.
Besides their delicacy is such, that it is impossible to submit them
to any kind of reagents. Only I have observed that they possess in an
eminent degree the property of horny hardening, and that they do not
yield in this respect to the cerebral. This delicacy depends upon this,
that all the filaments are separate from each other, instead of being
like the preceding, collected into cords; it is this also that makes
these nerves so numerous. If all the filaments of the brachial plexus
were separated like those of the solar, they would present the same
appearance and the same number in their interlacing.

Do the primitive plexuses formed by the ganglions perform a part in the
nervous functions? are they centres to which are referred important
phenomena? What has not been said upon this subject, concerning the
solar plexus? But nothing, I believe, of all that has been advanced is
founded upon accurate observation.

The plexuses of organic life are soon separated into different
divisions, which go to different parts, to those especially of this
life. These divisions arise from an infinite number of little filaments
which go constantly separate, though placed near each other, and which
never unite into cords like the preceding. They accompany almost all
the arteries; thus the renal, the hepatic, the splenic, the coronary
stomachic, the mesenterics, the hypogastric, the carotid and its
distributions, &c. are surrounded with filaments coming from ganglions.
These filaments go in two ways. 1st. Some accompany the artery without
being connected with it; considerable cellular texture separates them;
they go in its course without intermixing in a sensible manner with
it. 2d. The others form for it, if we may so say, a new coat, exterior
to the others, which adhere to it intimately, and which interlace so
together, that they might be taken for a network surrounding the artery.

When the artery runs but a short course, these two orders of branches
remain distinct from each other as far as the organ, as we see
around the splenic, the hepatic, the renal, &c.; but if the course
is longer, the external branches gradually get into the plexus, and
are entirely lost there. This plexus can be followed upon the great
trunks; it divides upon each branch, and can be still seen; but such
is its tenuity upon the minute ramifications that it disappears there
entirely. The spermatic is one of the arteries upon which it can be
traced the longest. The arteries of the extremities appear to be
destitute of it. In general it is upon those that go to the central
organs of internal life, that this network is the most evident. When
we deduct from the sum of the filaments coming from the ganglions,
those by which they communicate on one part with each other, and on
the other with the nerves of animal life, we see that almost all the
rest is finally destined to accompany the arteries. This arrangement
is wholly different from that of the cerebral nerves, whose filaments
are only in apposition with the vessels. These make almost an integrant
part of them, the adhesion is so intimate; this certainly supposes
a use of which we are ignorant, relative to the circulation, or to
the other organic functions. As these vessels distribute every where
the materials of these functions, of the secretions, exhalations,
nutrition, &c. the organic nerves have no doubt some influence upon
them. Neither experiment or observation have taught us any thing upon
this point.

The veins are not accompanied by so many organic nerves. It is the
same as it respects the absorbent trunks, which go almost every where
separate from this system.

The constant union of the arteries with the organic plexuses, an
union that presents an arrangement wholly different from that of the
ganglions, has undoubtedly an influence upon the action of these
plexuses, or rather upon that of the nerves that go from them, by the
motion the blood communicates to them. It should be remarked upon this
subject, that as nature has placed a crowd of arteries at the base of
the brain to agitate it with an alternate motion, she has put also the
most considerable plexus of the whole organic system upon one of the
places to which the red blood communicates the strongest impulse, viz.
upon the trunk of the cœliac.


III. _Structure, Properties, &c._

From what has been said above, it is evident that the nerves going from
the ganglions are of two sorts as it respects organization; 1st. those
that are identified with the cerebral system, by their white colour,
by the possibility of dividing their trunks into distinct cords, and
these into filaments, which appear to have nervous coats and medullary
substance like the preceding; 2d. those which present only little
separate filaments, greyish or reddish, soft, and which are seen in
prodigious numbers in the plexuses. Have these a nervous coat and a
medullary substance? It is impossible to determine it.

The properties of texture are ascertained with difficulty in the
organic nerves. As to vital properties, it is undoubted that the animal
sensibility is not as much raised in these nerves as in those of animal
life. I have often laid bare the plexuses in the abdomen; then by
letting the animal rest a moment, and by irritating them comparatively
with the lumbar nerves, I have uniformly made this remark. We know that
very frequently the ligature of the spermatic artery is not painful in
sarcocele, though the branches coming from the ganglions form for it
a plexus like a network, which can in no way be separated from it. If
we draw out a portion of intestines by a small wound in the abdomen,
the irritation of the sub-mucous layer at the side of the vessels,
is hardly felt, though many nerves of ganglions are found at this
place. I have had numerous occasions to act in different ways upon the
carotid, to which the superior cervical ganglion furnishes branches
from above; now, as long as I did not touch the par vagum, the animal
remained tranquil. I am far, however, from believing in the absolute
insensibility of the nerves of the ganglions; but certainly under the
circumstances that I have related, the cerebral nerves would have
caused much more pain to the animal.

I think that in a morbid state this sensibility is susceptible of being
greatly raised. We certainly cannot deny but that the solar plexus
takes a great part in the different sensations that are experienced
at the epigastric region; the very acute pains that often attend the
formation of aneurisms, are probably owing in part to the distension
of the nervous filaments that surround the artery. I have already said
that it is probable that the organic nerves are much concerned in the
different sensations that are produced by some peculiar neuroses.

These nerves occasion evident sympathies in certain cases. It is to
this that must be referred the different affections that Petit de Namur
has produced in the organ of sight, by irritating their branches that
are accessible. The development of the nerves of the ganglions follows
nearly the same laws as that of those organs from which they emanate.

Let us observe in finishing this system, that there is no one that
ought to arrest the attention of physiologists more. All the others
present a series of phenomena already well known. Of this, we have
hardly any knowledge. It does not present as yet, if we may so say,
but some of the negative attributes of the nervous system of animal
life. Thus it is without doubt that the organic nerves do not have the
same part as the preceding in animal sensibility; that they are always
foreign to contractility of the same species; that they have no direct
influence upon the sensible organic, since as we shall see, we can cut
or irritate them without destroying or hastening the motion of the
muscles to which they go. But in knowing the parts they do not perform
we are ignorant of those to which they are really destined. I have
already observed that the difficulty of making experiments upon the
ganglions and the plexuses, will much retard the progress of science.
We have scarcely any branches upon the exterior upon which we can act.

Scarpa has collected the opinions of all who have preceded him,
together with his own, upon the uses of the ganglions. I refer to what
he has said upon this subject. As the general point of view in which
he has presented these organs, and that in which I offer them here,
differ essentially, the account that I have just given of the nerves
of organic life has necessarily a general stamp wholly different from
that of his work, a work, however, which, like all this author has
published, confers the greatest honour upon the state of anatomy at the
period in which we live.

I will terminate this article by an important reflection. If the nerves
were only divided to form the ganglions, if these presented in their
interior only differences of forms, and a very minute division of their
filaments, why should they be so constant in animals? Many organs are
wanting, vary, are presented under a thousand various forms in their
different classes; on the contrary, the ganglions are constant. In
those species even in which the cerebral system is imperfect, that of
the ganglions is complete in its organization. Animal life diminishes
and is contracted in an evident manner in most insects, in worms,
&c. and generally in animals without verterbræ. The brain and the
nerves become less evidently marked in proportion as this life is less
perfect. The organic is, on the contrary, almost in its perfection in
these animals. The ganglions and their nerves are also very evident.
This remark has struck me in reading the researches of different
authors upon the anatomy of the lower classes of animals; now, if
the ganglions were not the centres of certain important functions
of which we are ignorant, would they be so invariable in the animal
organization?




VASCULAR SYSTEM

WITH RED BLOOD.


ARTICLE FIRST.

GENERAL REMARKS UPON THE CIRCULATION.

All authors have considered the circulation in the same way, since the
celebrated discovery of Harvey. They have divided this function into
two; one has been called the great circulation, the other, the small or
pulmonary. The heart, being between the two, is their common centre.
But in presenting in this point of view the course of the blood, it
is difficult at first sight to perceive the general object of its
course in our organs. The method in which I explain in my lectures this
important phenomenon of the living economy, appears to me infinitely
better calculated to give a great idea of it.


I. _Division of the circulation._

I divide the circulation also into two; one carries the blood from
the lungs to all the parts; the other brings it from all parts to the
lungs. The first is the circulation of red blood, the second that of
black.


_Circulation of red blood._

The circulation of the red blood commences in the capillary system
of the lungs, where the blood acquires, by the mixture of the
principles that it draws from the air,[6] the peculiar character that
distinguishes it from the black blood. From this system it passes into
the first divisions, then into the trunks of the pulmonary veins; these
pour it into the left auricle of the heart, which transmits it to the
ventricle, and this drives it into the arterial system; this spreads
it into the general capillary system, which may be truly considered as
the termination of its course. The red blood is then constantly carried
from the capillary system of the lungs to the general capillary system.
The cavities that contain it are all lined with a continuous membrane;
this membrane spread upon the pulmonary veins, upon the left cavities
of the heart and upon the whole arterial system, may be considered as
a general and continuous canal, the exterior of which is strengthened
in the pulmonary veins by a loose membrane, in the heart by a fleshy
surface, which is delicate in the auricle, thick in the ventricle, and
in the arterial system by a fibrous layer of a peculiar nature. In
these varieties of the organs that are thus added to it without, this
membrane remains every where nearly the same, as we shall see.

 [6] It may be remarked, that this work was published at a time when
 the theory of the oxygenation of the blood was universally considered
 as explaining in a satisfactory manner the change that is effected
 in the colour of the blood by the lungs. The experiments of Allen,
 Pepys, and others, and the Treatises of Ellis, have proved to the
 satisfaction of most physiologists of the present day, that this
 change in the colour is not owing to the absorption of oxygen by the
 blood, but to the extrication of carbon from it. _Tr._


_Circulation of the black blood._

The circulation of the black blood is performed in a manner the reverse
of the preceding. It begins in the general capillary system; it is
in this system, that its blood takes the peculiar character that
distinguishes it from the preceding; it is here that it is formed, by
the subtraction probably of the principles of the air that it acquired
by terminating its course in the lungs. From this general capillary
system, it enters the veins which transmit it to the right cavities
of the heart, which send it by the pulmonary artery, to the capillary
system of the lungs. This system is its real termination, as it is the
commencement of the circulation of the red blood. A general membrane,
every where continued, lines the whole course of the black blood,
and forms for it also a general and continuous canal, in which it is
constantly carried from all parts to the interior of the lungs. At the
exterior of this great canal, nature has placed a loose membrane in the
veins, fleshy fibres in the heart, and a peculiar fibrous texture in
the pulmonary artery; but, like the preceding canal, it remains always
nearly uniform, notwithstanding this difference of organs to which it
is united externally. It is by the folds of this membrane in the veins
that the valves are formed. It contributes to form all those of the
right side of the heart, whose cavities it lines, as the preceding
enters into the composition of the valves of the left side, which
borrows from it the membrane that lines it.


_Difference of the two circulations._

From the general idea that I have given of the two circulations, it
is evident that they are perfectly independent of each other, except
at their origin and termination, where the red and black blood are
alternately transformed into each other, and communicate for this
purpose by the capillary vessels. In their whole course they are
entirely separate. Though the two portions of the heart are united
in one single organ, they may however be considered as uniformly
independent in their action. There are truly two hearts, a right and
a left. Both would be able perhaps to perform their functions as well
if they were separate, as they now do united. When the foramen ovale
remains open after birth, I have proved elsewhere that such is the
arrangement of the two folds between which it is found, that the black
blood cannot communicate with the red, and that the two hearts should
equally be considered independent, at least as it respects the course
of the blood. This entire separation of the two circulations is one of
their most striking characters; it alone proves how much preferable the
point of view in which I have presented the circulation, is to that
which divides it into great and small, which are evidently confounded
and identified.

From what has been said, it appears that the origin and termination of
each circulation take place in the two capillary systems, which are, if
we may so say, the limits between which the two kinds of blood move.
The lungs alone correspond in this respect, with all the parts. Their
capillary system is in opposition to that of all the other organs, if
we except the parts from which the blood of the vena porta goes. Each
capillary system then is at the same time an origin and termination.
The pulmonary is the origin of the circulation of the red blood, and
the termination of that of the black. The general gives to the red
blood its termination, and to the black blood its origin. Observe that
this is a great character that distinguishes the two circulations. In
fact, the blood not only takes an opposite course at the place where
they finish and at that where they begin; but its nature changes also
entirely, and in this respect the two capillary systems, pulmonary
and general, present to us the most important phenomena of the living
economy, viz. the first, the transformation of black blood into red,
the second, that of red blood into black.

There are evidently three things to be examined with regard to each of
the circulations, 1st. the origin; 2d. the course; 3d. the termination
of each kind of blood. In the origin and termination, there is on
one hand the mechanical phenomena of circulation, on the other the
phenomena of the transformation of the blood. In the course of this
fluid there is only the mechanical phenomena of the circulation to be
observed.


_General mechanical phenomena of the two circulations._

By examining these phenomena in a general manner, we see, 1st. that the
red blood going from the lungs, is formed into larger and less numerous
columns, as it approaches the cavities of the heart; that it is in the
greatest masses in these cavities, and that from them to the capillary
system, it is continually dividing into smaller columns; 2d. that the
black blood going from the general capillary system, is formed into
columns larger and less frequent, as it approaches the right cavities
of the heart; that these cavities contain the greatest quantity of
it, and that from them to the lungs, it is successively divided into
smaller columns.

The two kinds of blood circulate then on the two sides in branches that
diminish as they go from the heart, and increase as they approach it.
Represent to yourself for each of the two circulations two trees united
at their trunks, sending their branches, one of them to the lungs, the
other to all the parts. Each of the two parts of the heart is between
these trunks, which it serves to unite, so as to form a general canal
of which we have spoken.

Authors have commonly considered the arteries and veins as forming,
each by their assemblage, a cone, the base of which is at all the
parts, and the apex at the heart. This manner of describing them arises
from this, that the sum of the branches is greater in diameter, than
that of the trunks from which they arise; now in adopting this idea,
it is evident that each half of the heart is at the summit of two
cones, which would be united without it. The pulmonary veins represent
one, and the aorta the other for the red blood; for the black blood,
there is on one part the venæ cavæ and coronary veins, on the other,
the pulmonary artery, which form the two cones. In each circulation,
one of these cones is remarkable for its small size; it is that of the
lungs; the other for its great extent; it is that of all the parts.

Placed between these two cones, each part of the heart should be
considered as an agent of impulse which hastens the course of the
blood, on one hand towards all the parts, on the other towards the
lungs. In fact, if in each circulation these two cones communicate by
their apex, it is evident that the parietes of the vessels that compose
them would be insufficient to maintain the motion, from the base of one
to the base of the other; that is to say from the general capillary
system to that of the lungs, and reciprocally from that of the lungs
to the general one. The course is manifestly too long, and the vital
forces of the vascular parietes not sufficient to admit of this; hence
the necessity of the heart.

This consequence leads to another, which is this. As the red blood has
a greater extent to go over from the heart to the general capillary
system, than the black blood has from the heart to the pulmonary
capillary system, it is necessary that the portion of this organ
belonging to the first kind of blood, should be endowed with a greater
force than that destined to support the motion of the latter. Nature
has effected this object by composing the ventricle with red blood
of fibres much stronger than those of that of black blood. As to
the auricles, as they only receive the blood and transmit it to the
ventricles, their thickness is nearly uniform.

From this we see, 1st. that the part the heart performs in the two
circulations, is absolutely relative to the mechanical phenomena of
the course of the blood, and that, if it has any influence upon the
composition, it can only be by the internal motion it communicates to
it; 2d. that if the course of the two circulations, of black blood and
red, was of less extent, they might do without this intermediate agent
of impulse. This is precisely what happens in the system of abdominal
black blood, the two trees of which distributing their branches, one to
the gastric viscera, the other to the liver, unite by their trunk in
what is called the sinus of the vena porta, which occupies exactly the
place of the heart in the great system of black blood and in that of
red.

It is then possible to conceive, 1st. how the heart may fail; of this
we have many examples, in which the two great circulating systems
resemble in a certain degree, the abdominal; 2d. how the blood can
oscillate from one capillary system to the other, during a considerable
time, though the heart, weak, enfeebled, and even in part disorganized,
can hardly any longer accelerate the course of this fluid; 3d. how,
this organ having entirely suspended its pulsation in syncope,
asphyxia, &c. there is still an oscillation, a real progression of the
blood from one capillary system to the other, so that if an artery or
vein is then opened, it flows a little at the opening. Certainly this
oscillation is very weak; it cannot last a long time; but we cannot
deny that it exists without the influence of the heart, since the black
blood is carried without the agent of impulse, from the intestines to
the liver; hence it follows that the cessation of the pulsation of
the heart is not a proof of the want of motion in the blood, as some
authors have thought. 4th. We know that in many animals of the lower
classes, there is no heart, though there are distinct vessels and
circulating fluids.

The importance of the part that the heart enjoys in the animal economy
is only in relation to the general impulse that it communicates to
all the organs and the constant excitement in which it keeps them by
this impulse. It does not send to them the materials of secretion, of
exhalation and of nutrition; it only in this respect transmits what it
receives from the lungs.


II. _Reflections upon the general uses of the circulation._

This leads us to some reflections upon the general differences of the
uses of the two circulations; differences which prove the necessity
of presenting the single function that results from them in the view
in which I have placed it, and not in that in use in the treatises on
physiology. The following are the differences.


_General uses of the circulation of the red blood._

It is the circulation of the red blood that alone furnishes the matter
of secretions, except that of the bile, a fluid which however deserves
a further examination. It is from this circulation that the serous,
cellular, cutaneous, medullary exhalants, &c. draw the fluids that
they transmit upon their respective surfaces. All the vessels that
carry the matter of nutrition of the organs are also continuous with
the arteries and consequently their fluids come from the red blood.
In the organs even in which the black blood goes, as in the lungs and
the liver, there are vessels with red blood evidently for the purposes
of nutrition. It is the red blood that communicates to the organs of
the whole body that general agitation which is necessary to their
functions, an agitation so evident in the brain. The circulation of red
blood is then the most important; it is that, whence are derived the
great phenomena of the economy.


_General uses of the circulation of black blood._

The circulation of the black blood, on the contrary, having no
connexion with any of the functions, seems only destined to repair, if
we may so say, the losses the blood has sustained in the preceding
one. Observe in fact that a considerable part of the red blood is
expended in the exhalations, secretions and nutrition. The principles
it borrowed in the lungs and which gave it a vermilion colour, have
been left in the general capillary system. It is necessary that the
black blood should receive what the other has lost; now a variety of
substances enters the great canal that contains it. These substances
are internal or external. 1st. The great trunks of the absorbents
constantly pour in the lymph of the cellular texture and of the
serous surfaces, the residue of the nutrition of all the organs, the
super-abundant fat, synovia and marrow. All that which is to be thrown
from within out, is first poured into the black blood. 2d. All that
which enters in from without, is also received by it. The chyle, the
product of digestion, is at first uniformly carried into the general
canal, in which it circulates. In the second place, it is with it that
are mixed the substances of the air, which pass through the lungs in
the act of respiration. In fine, when cutaneous or mucous absorptions
take place, the black blood is always the first that receives the
product of them.

It follows from this, that the circulation of black blood is, if we may
so say, a general reservoir in which is poured in the first place all
that is to go out of the body, and all that is to enter it.

In this last respect, it performs an essential part in diseases;
in fact it is undeniable, 1st. that deleterious substances maybe
introduced with the chyle into the economy, and produce ravages there
more or less evident in circulating with our fluids. For this, it is
sufficient that the organic sensibility of the chylous vessels should
be changed; then they admit what before they rejected, as the glands
by changes in their organic sensibility, often secrete fluids that are
usually foreign to them. 2d. We shall prove in the article upon the
cutaneous system, that it is oftentimes the seat of the absorption of
deleterious substances. 3d. We cannot doubt that besides the principles
that colour the blood, there often passes through the lungs deleterious
miasmata which produce diseases, as my experiments upon asphyxia have
proved. The intestines, the lungs and the skin are then a triple gate
open, in many cases, to different morbific causes; now these causes
that enter thus into the economy are all received in the first place in
the black blood; it is not until afterwards that they pass into the red
blood.

An evident proof of this assertion is this, that we produce
phenomena exactly analogous to those which result from them, by
pouring artificially into the black blood those substances that are
introduced in a natural way. Thus when a purgative or emetic infusion
is introduced into the veins, alvine evacuations or vomiting ensue,
precisely as when the substances of these infusions are introduced by
friction upon the skin. The experiments of many physiologists leave no
doubt upon this point. I am convinced that it is possible to give to
animals artificial diseases, by making different substances infused
into their veins circulate with the blood. I shall speak of these
attempts in the article upon the glandular system. It is sufficient for
me to mention them here, in order to prove that the black blood is a
general reservoir in which many substances can enter, either naturally,
or accidentally, and afterwards disturb the functions by passing into
the whole circulating mass. The humoral pathology has undoubtedly been
exaggerated, but it has still real foundations, and in many cases we
cannot deny, but that every thing arises from the disorders of the
humours.

Let us conclude from all that has hitherto been said, 1st. that the
essential part which the circulation of the black blood performs in
the economy, is to introduce into this blood different new substances;
2d. that that of the system of red blood is to expend on the contrary,
the principles that constitute it. One is constantly increasing, the
other diminishing; to give is the attribute of one, to receive is that
of the other. This sketch, which is perfectly true, and founded upon
the most simple observation, appears to me very proper to establish an
evident demarcation between the two divisions that I have adopted for
the general circulation.

Health supposes a perfect equilibrium between the losses the red blood
experiences, and the acquisitions the black blood makes. Whenever this
equilibrium is destroyed, there is disease. If the black blood receives
more than the red blood expends, plethora follows. That which is called
the poverty of the humours, is manifest when more substances go from
the red blood than enter the black.

These are I think sufficient characteristic attributes of the two
great divisions of the general circulation, to justify the point of
view different from other authors, in which I present this important
function of the animal economy.


ARTICLE SECOND.

SITUATION, FORMS, AND GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM OF RED
BLOOD.

From the general idea that we have given of the two vascular systems,
we should form the following of the position in the economy of that
with red blood.

1st. The capillary system of the lungs gives rise to many minute
ramifications, which soon unite into small branches, then into larger
ones, and finally into four great trunks, two for each lung. These
trunks open into the left auricle towards its superior part. 2d. This,
distinguished from the right by having fewer fleshy columns, by its
smaller size, by the greater elongation of its appendix, which is
narrower than that of the other, &c. communicates by an oval opening
furnished with valves, with the left ventricle, the thickness of whose
parietes, the arrangement of the fleshy columns, &c. distinguish it
from the right. 3d. From this ventricle goes the aorta, the common
trunk whence arise all those that carry red blood to all the parts,
where they terminate in the general capillary system.

The first tree of the system of red blood, the trunk of the second and
the heart that serves to unite them, are found then concentrated in
the cavity of the thorax, whilst the branches of the second trunk are
distributed among all the organs of the economy, and even to all its
extremities.

It is nearly between the superior third of the body and the inferior,
that is found the agent of impulse of the red blood, or the heart.
This position is important; it places under a more immediate influence
of this viscus, the superior parts, the head especially, all of
whose organs, and particularly the brain, require inevitably a very
active and habitual excitement from the blood, in order to keep their
functions in permanent activity. Thus observe, that in the gangrene
of old people, and the affections that arise from the blood not being
driven with sufficient force to all the parts, it is the extremity of
the foot that is first affected, and that of the head and the hands
become much later the seat of mortification. In general, there are
many differences between the phenomena that take place in the superior
parts, and those that happen in the inferior. We shall see in the
dermoid system, that the portion of the general capillary system which
belongs to the first, is penetrated with blood with infinitely more
ease, than the portion belonging to the inferior parts, as asphyxia,
apoplexy, submersion, different cutaneous eruptions, injections
even prove, which in young subjects blacken rather the face than the
inferior parts; now this difference arises evidently from the relation
of position of the superior and inferior parts with the heart.

We have no general remarks to offer here upon the first tree and upon
the agent of impulse of the circulation of red blood. In fact, the
remarks belonging to the lungs and the heart will be given in the
Descriptive Anatomy. It is then especially the second or arterial tree,
whose distribution is now to occupy us. It is necessary in this article
to examine the origin, course and termination of it.


I. _Origin of the Arteries._

This article comprehends the origin of the aorta at the left ventricle,
that of the trunks which arise from it, then that of the branches, the
smaller ones and the minute ramifications that go from them.


_Origin of the Aorta._

Most authors have described inaccurately the manner of the union of
this great arterial trunk with the heart. This is the manner; the
internal membrane of the heart with red blood, after having lined
its ventricle, approaches the opening of the aorta, is attached
there, forms by its folds the three semi-lunar valves, and stretching
afterwards into the artery, covers it in its whole extent. It is this
internal membrane that forms the union of the artery with the heart.
The peculiar or fibrous membrane is not identified with the fibres of
the heart. Its extremity is cut into three semi-circular festoons,
which correspond with the semi-lunar valves that they support. These
festoons do not extend to the fleshy fibres; there is between them and
these fibres a space of two or three lines that the internal membrane
alone covers. Between them and consequently between the valves, we
perceive three little empty triangular spaces, covered by the membrane
also. To distinguish this structure clearly, the origin of the aorta
must be dissected well from without, and stripped entirely of the
fatty texture that surrounds it. Then by cutting this artery and the
ventricle, and by examining when held up to the light the union of one
with the other, after having first removed the valves, we distinguish
very well by the transparency of the internal membrane and the opacity
of the three festoons that commence the aorta, the arrangement that
I have just pointed out. It follows from this, that if the artery is
accurately dissected on its exterior, and we detach from below upwards
the internal membrane that forms the great canal of the circulation of
the red blood, the artery is entirely separated from the heart. This
entire separation of the fibres of the aorta from those of the heart,
would alone be a strong presumption that their nature is not the same
if many other considerations did not prove it in the most evident
manner.


_Origin of the trunks, branches, smaller branches, &c._

Arising thus from the left ventricle, the aorta divides almost
immediately into two branches, one ascending goes to the neck, head
and superior extremities; the other descending to the chest, abdomen
and lower extremities. The first being very soon subdivided into four
principal trunks, differs in this respect from the second, which forms
for a long time one trunk only. The latter having to go over a much
greater distance than the other, preserves with more certainty by this
arrangement the whole of the motion that is given to the blood by the
heart; this does not prevent, however, owing to the less distance, the
impulse from being more sensibly felt by the superior than the inferior
organs, as I have said above. At the superior part of the pelvis, the
aorta divides into two secondary trunks. Soon after, subdivisions begin
under the name of branches, which are afterwards multiplied under that
of ramifications, &c.

Mathematical anatomists have exaggerated the number of the arterial
sub-divisions. Many have thought there were a hundred to one artery;
Haller reduced the number to twenty, and even less. To ascertain
what is really the case, it is necessary to take the arteries at
their origin, and follow their course under a serous membrane, the
peritoneum for example, where they are every where very apparent; it
will be seen in this way, that the sub-divisions are not more numerous
than is stated by Haller; I have frequently satisfied myself of this.
Besides, the inspection of a living animal whose abdomen is opened, is
almost the only means that can be employed without danger of mistake.
Injections when too coarse do not fill all the branches; when too
fine, they pass into the exhalant vessels, and communicate to the
whole serous surface a colour that is not natural to it. It is almost
impossible to ascertain by injections, the precise point of the natural
circulation. To be convinced of this, inject a dog and open the abdomen
of another of the same size; you will see uniformly in one more or
less vessels injected, than are seen in the other filled with blood.
I frequently performed this experiment, at the time I was engaged in
demonstrating the insufficiency of injections, either fine or coarse,
to show the quantity of blood in any part.

When they divide, the arteries form among themselves very different
angles. Sometimes right angles, as at the middle intercostals;
sometimes obtuse, which is more rare, as at the superior intercostals;
most commonly they are acute, particularly in the extremities. The
origin of the spermatic artery is an instance of the extreme of this
last kind of origin.

We observe in general, that wherever there are two divisions, one is
larger than the other. The largest follows the original direction of
the principal trunk, from which the other is more or less separated.
In the interior of the artery, an eminence formed by the fold of the
internal membrane, corresponds with the angle entering from without,
and breaking the column of the blood, favours the change of its course.
This eminence presents an arrangement, that is very variable, which is
owing to the angle of origin. 1st. If the angle is a right one, the
eminence has a circular arrangement and is equally evident in the whole
circumference. 2d. If the angle is acute, as at the mesenteric, then
this eminence is very evident between the branch that arises and the
continuation of the trunk; it forms even a kind of semi-circular spur
or projection, but between the trunk itself and the branch that arises
from it, the union of which forms an obtuse angle, this eminence is
less conspicuous. The more obtuse the angle is, and consequently the
more opposed it is to acute, the less sensible is this second eminence;
it has like the other a semi-circular form, and makes by its union with
it a whole circle which is oblique; so that the portion of the circle
formed by this second eminence is nearer the heart than that made by
the other. 3d. If the angle of origin is obtuse, and consequently that
formed by the branch with the continuation of the trunk is obtuse,
things are then arranged in an inverse manner. There is at the mouth of
the artery an oblique circle, the prominent half of which is nearest
the heart.

The origin of the arterial trunks is generally pretty uniform; but that
of the branches is so variable, that hardly any two subjects have the
same arrangement, in this respect. Take for example the hypogastric;
it would be impossible to form the least idea of its branches, if,
neglecting the manner they separate from each other, you paid attention
only to their course and distribution. These numberless varieties in
the forms, are a remarkable character in organic life to which the
arteries belong. This character must be placed at the side of the
constant irregularity of the arteries. There is no symmetry in their
general distribution, as in the distribution of the nerves of animal
life. Those even of the extremities, that correspond, differ frequently
in their mode of origin and the course of their branches.

The branches, smaller branches, &c. arise at distances very near
each other. There is hardly any, except the carotid, internal iliac,
&c. that runs a considerable course without furnishing some. Thus
experiments in which it is necessary to introduce tubes into arteries,
to open them, &c. can scarcely be made except upon the first of these,
they are prevented in others by divisions that arise from them and
hinder us from raising the artery to any considerable extent.

The origin of the arterial trunks, branches, smaller branches and
ramifications, does not take place in a gradual and necessarily
successive manner. Thus the smaller branches, and the ramifications
even, arise equally from trunks and branches; for example, the
bronchial, thymic arteries, &c. go from the aorta, and yet they are
not so large as most of the divisions of the tibial, which is itself a
third division of the aorta.


II. _Course of the arteries._

In their course the arteries present differences according as we
examine, the trunks, the branches and smaller branches.


_Course of the trunks and branches._

The trunks are the first divisions continuous with the two great
portions of the aorta; such are above, the internal and external
carotids, the subclavians, &c.; below, the iliacs, the hypogastrics,
&c. Generally they are situated in broad interstices, that contain much
cellular texture, as in the groin, the axilla, the neck, the sides of
the pelvis, &c. By dividing they form branches that are received into
smaller and narrower interstices, and are consequently more exposed
to the influence of the neighbouring organs. Both of them are covered
almost every where by a thickness of parts that protects them from
external injury. Besides this protection that the neighbouring parts
and particularly the muscles afford them, they accelerate also the
circulation of the blood, and reciprocally the motion of the arterial
trunks gives to the neighbouring organs and even to the whole limb,
a sensible motion, an agitation that supports its vital energy. This
agitation, which it is often difficult to perceive, sometimes becomes
very evident upon mere inspection. When the elbow is rested upon
the table, and a body of considerable length held in the hand, its
extremity is seen to vaccillate, to rise and fall a little at each
pulsation. If the legs are crost, being first bent upon the thighs,
a spontaneous rising is noticed in that which is supported. To this
we must refer also the cerebral motion, that which is communicated to
tumours that are situated over a great artery, &c. &c.

The trunks and the branches are accompanied by veins, and surrounded
in general with a large quantity of fat, a circumstance that has been
considered favourable to the opinion of those who think that this fluid
is exhaled by the pores of the arteries. We have already said what
should be thought of this opinion.

The direction varies in the trunks and the branches. Usually straight
in the trunks, as in the carotids, the internal and abdominal iliacs,
it renders the circulation less evident. When these trunks are exposed
in a living animal, we do not see any kind of locomotion there, as we
do when the curves are great. There is however some exception to this
rule as it respects the direction of the trunks; the arch of the aorta
is an example of it, so is the internal carotid, which has numerous
curves, which are thought incorrectly, to be necessary to prevent
the impetus of the blood from producing derangement in the delicate
substance of the brain. More tortuous in the branches, this direction
occasions the arterial locomotion that constitutes almost exclusively
the pulse, according to many physicians.


_Course of the smaller branches, ramifications, &c._

Whilst the trunks occupy the large interstices that are left between
several organs, and the branches the smaller ones that separate
particular organs, the smaller branches are found in the interior of
these same organs, without, however, entering into their intimate
structure. Thus in the muscles, they are interposed between their
fibres; in the brain, in the circumvolutions; in the glands, between
the lobes that form them, &c. By them, an internal motion communicated
to the whole organ, facilitates its functions by supporting its partial
activity, as the motion of which I spoke above, supports the general
activity of the part. Besides, the sudden cessation of life, when the
blood ceases to agitate the brain, proves the immediate connexion
between this internal motion and its energy. Thus we observe that life
is much more active wherever the arteries are numerous, as in the
muscles, the skin, the mucous surfaces, &c.; whilst on the contrary its
phenomena are weaker and more obscure in the less vascular organs, as
in the tendons, the cartilages, the bones and the other white parts.

In the smaller branches, the windings are much more evident than in
the branches. Injections make them very conspicuous, especially in the
brain; but as they depend principally upon the cellular texture they
disappear in part, if we separate from it the vessels of all the parts.
Do these windings diminish the rapidity of the circulation, and does
the straightness of the arteries increase this rapidity as much as
physiologists suppose? I think they have exaggerated the effects of the
direction of the arteries; the following are proofs of it. 1st. If in
living animals we expose the hollow organs, as the stomach, intestines,
&c. alternately in a state of fulness and in that of vacuity, I have
observed that the circulation is almost equally rapid in both cases,
though fulness renders almost straight the vessels of these organs, and
that emptiness, by forcing them to wrinkle, increases their curves.
2d. I have opened the carotid artery of a dog, and having observed the
force with which the blood is thrown out, I have also opened both sides
of the thorax; immediately the lungs are collapsed and consequently
the windings of their vessels increased; notwithstanding this no
diminution in the force with which the blood escapes from the artery,
after having gone through the lungs is immediately sensible. It is only
gradually that the force is destroyed by the influence of causes, that
it is not my object to examine. 3d. If in another animal, an artery
being open, we open also the wind pipe, and by a syringe affixed to
the opening suddenly exhaust all the air the lungs contain, this organ
is immediately reduced to a very small size; the vessels become much
bent, and yet I have observed in this case that the blood goes from
the open artery with as much force as before, for a considerable time.
4th. Finally, after having opened the abdomen of a living animal, I
have alternately contracted and stretched the mesentery, whose numerous
arteries had been first opened; no difference is discoverable in the
force with which the blood is thrown out, in either case.

Let us conclude from these experiments, that the influence of the
direction of the arteries upon the course of the blood, is much less
than is commonly thought, and that all the calculations of mathematical
physicians upon the delay of the blood from this cause, rest upon
unsubstantial foundations. There is no doubt that when the fore arm is
strongly bent, the pulse is weakened, stops even, and it is essential
when we feel the pulse that the arm should be extended; but this
phenomenon does not depend upon the angle the artery forms; it arises
from this, that the muscles that press it, contract its caliber and
even obliterate it. This is so true, that the different curves of the
internal carotid are much more evident than the single curve that the
brachial then forms, and yet the circulation is performed there very
well. Besides, open an intercostal artery which has but few curves,
the force with which the blood will be thrown out is not stronger
than it would be from the radial, &c. If the whole arterial system
was empty and the blood going from the heart filled it successively,
as this fluid would strike against the arterial curvatures, it would
undoubtedly experience some delay. It is on this account that in our
injections a tortuous artery is slower in filling; as the spermatic for
example often remains empty. But in a number of tubes full of fluid, it
is wholly different; the impulse received at the beginning of them is
suddenly propagated into all the cavities that form them, and not by a
successive progression, as I shall say hereafter.

The arterial curvatures are adapted to the different states in which
the organs may be found. We see them very evident in those which are
subject to an alternate dilatation and contraction, for example in
the intestines, the lips, and the whole face. In the fœtus, when the
testicle is in the abdomen, the artery is very tortuous. When this
gland descends, the artery untwists and takes the straight course it
has in the adult. In the motions of the womb, the bladder, the pharynx,
the tongue, &c. these curvatures perform an important part in the
preservation of these organs. In the fractures of the lower jaw, they
prevent the rupture of the artery that traverses this bone, a rupture
which the displacing of the bone would produce without them. By them
the arterial system is preserved unhurt in the violent and oftentimes
forced motions that the limbs perform.

The flexibility of the arteries would be insufficient for these
motions; in fact, when an artery is extended longitudinally, its
diameter is diminished. By accommodating themselves to the motions of
our parts, the vessels would impede then the circulation, because there
would be less space for the blood to move in. Hence why the arteries
of all the parts subject to alternate dilatations and contractions,
being uniformly tortuous, can without the aid of their extensibility,
have very different degrees of extent. I would remark upon this subject
that the locomotion of the arteries, observed by Veitbrecht, is far
more evident at the time of the contraction of the hollow organs, or of
the flexion of the limbs, than during the dilatation of the one or the
extension of the others. I have invariably made this remark upon living
animals. We can by emptying or distending the intestines, the stomach,
the bladder, &c. make their arteries beat more or less strong, &c. &c.


_Anastomoses of the arteries in their course._

Anastomosis is the union of many branches, which mingle the columns of
blood that each brings. There are two kinds of anastomoses; sometimes
two equal trunks unite, sometimes a small trunk is joined to a large
one.

The first has three varieties. 1st. Two equal trunks sometimes unite at
an acute angle, and form but one; it is thus that the ductus arteriosus
and aorta are blended together in the fœtus; that the two vertebrals
produce the basilary trunks, &c. &c. 2d. Two trunks communicate at
certain places by a transverse branch; such are the two anterior
cerebral, before they go between the hemispheres. 3d. Two trunks unite
and form an arch; this is the case with the mesenteric; then branches
arise from the convexity of this arch. We see then that there are three
kinds of anastomoses between equal branches; one of these is that in
which two columns of blood are united together and take a direction
between the two first; another in which two columns follow their first
direction, and only communicate with each other; finally in the last,
two columns meet each other by their extremities, in an opposite
direction, and the blood escapes afterwards by secondary vessels.

The second kind of anastomoses is that of considerable branches with
smaller ones; it is extremely frequent, especially in the extremities;
it has no varieties.

It is almost always in regions remote from the heart that anastomoses
are met with. We find scarcely any in the trunks that arise from
the aorta. They begin to be more frequent in the branches, as in
the mesenteric, the cerebral, &c. The more the smaller branches
are subdivided, the more numerous are the anastomoses. In the last
ramifications they are so numerous that they form an inextricable
network. This arrangement is calculated to facilitate the circulation,
which the anastomoses favour in places, where the motion of the blood
is liable to experience obstacles. It is on this account that in the
cavities in which the influence of the neighbouring parts upon the
motion is less sensible, the anastomoses become more frequent, as in
the brain, the abdomen, &c.; whilst they are more rare in the muscular
interstices of the extremities, &c. It is not then a tree with distinct
branches that forms the arterial system, but a tree all the parts of
which communicate together, more frequently as they are the further
removed from the origin.

The principal object of the anastomoses, that of obviating the
obstacles the blood experiences in its course, is fulfilled in many
cases. Thus, after the ligature of a wounded artery or one with an
aneurism, after the spontaneous obliteration of one of these vessels,
we see the anastomoses between the fine branches, above and below
this obliteration or this ligature, continue the circulation in the
part. These collateral vessels then increase often in size; but more
frequently still, the course of the blood is supported almost entirely
by the capillary vessels.

Anastomoses suppose then the vitality of the arteries. It is because
these vessels are not inert, but act themselves upon the fluid they
contain, that the circulating phenomena are subject to so many
variations; that oftentimes, and especially by the influence of
the passions, the spasm of their extremities, principally of the
capillaries, obliges the blood to flow back, a reflux which is favoured
by the anastomoses. This reflux is necessary also in inflammations, in
the different engorgements of our organs, &c. How would the circulation
be able to go on, if all the small branches went to their respective
destinations, without communicating among themselves? Would not the
least embarrassment occasion a troublesome stagnation there?

I would remark upon this subject that the anastomoses furnish the
first proof of a truth which we shall soon demonstrate more in detail,
viz. that in the great trunks, the blood is especially influenced
by the heart, and that in the capillaries, it is exclusively by the
vascular parietes. In fact it is because the vitality of the arteries
is every thing for the motion of the last subdivisions, that the
least alterations that they experience give rise to many engorgements
that inevitably require anastomoses, which are extremely numerous at
the end of the arterial tree. On the other hand, the vitality of the
trunks having scarcely any influence upon the blood, it experiences
but few obstacles in passing through them; there is less need then of
anastomoses, which are in fact more rare there.

If the least cause, the least irritation produced spasm of the trunks,
as they produce that of their last divisions, it would be necessary
that they should communicate as frequently together. A fleshy texture
in the great arteries, and vital properties analogous to the
involuntary muscles, would have required inevitably these numerous
anastomoses, because a variety of causes influencing these kinds of
muscles, they can at any moment increase unnaturally their contraction,
diminish their caliber and embarrass the progress of the fluids that
traverse them.


_Forms of the Arteries in their course._

Many physicians of the present age have described each artery as
forming a cone, the base of which is towards the heart, and the apex
towards the extremities. If we examine a portion of it between the
origin of two branches, whether after having injected it, or by cutting
it perpendicularly when it is empty, or by measuring it when it is full
of blood, we find it always cylindrical. Undoubtedly considered in its
whole extent, it takes a conical form, the effect of its successive
diminution by the branches it furnishes; but in this sense it is less a
cone, than a series of cylinders successively joined to each other and
always decreasing.

Considered in its general arrangement, the arterial system represents
on the contrary, as I have said, a cone absolutely inverted, that is
to say, having its base at all the parts and its apex at the heart;
so that the aorta has a diameter less considerable in proportion,
than that of the sum of all the branches. We have a proof of this by
comparing a trunk with two branches that succeed it; these surpass
it in diameter, and the relation being always the same in all the
subdivisions, we conceive that the capacity of the arterial system goes
uniformly increasing.

This relation of the trunks and the branches has been exaggerated
however by mathematical physiologists, who attributed to the last over
the first a predominance much greater than really existed. A cause of
error upon this point may arise from measuring the arteries at their
exterior after having injected them; in fact, the caliber of the
trunks is greater, in proportion to their parietes, than that of the
branches separately examined; that is to say, other things being equal,
the aorta has parietes thinner in proportion to its cavity, than the
cubital artery; hence, without doubt, why aneurisms are rare in the
branches, and frequent in the trunks, especially when the diseases
arise from a local cause; for if they are the effect of a general
disease, oftentimes the little arteries, the radial particularly, are
also affected; I have already seen two examples of it. This observation
upon the proportions of the arterial parietes proves the impossibility
of judging of the relations of diameter between the two, at least by
examining them in the interior.

Besides, these relations are necessarily very variable, according as
the vital forces which vary themselves so much, increase or contract
the caliber of the small arteries; and in this point of view, this
examination cannot have the importance that was attached to it by the
ancients, whose works are filled with calculations upon this point.


III. _Termination of the Arteries._

After being divided, subdivided, and having the peculiarities we have
just examined, the arteries terminate in the general capillary system.
To point out where this system begins, and where the arteries end,
would be very difficult. We can prove that there the blood ceases to
be entirely under the influence of the heart, and circulates by the
influence of the insensible organic contractility of the vascular
parietes; but how can this line of demarcation be rendered evident to
the eye?

Authors in treating of the termination of the arteries, have considered
their continuity with the excretories, the exhalants, the veins, &c.;
but it is evident that the general capillary system is between the
arteries and these vessels. Thus I shall treat of their origin in
speaking of this system, which is spread in all the organs, but has
essential differences according to the different systems, under the
relation of its continuity with the arteries. In fact, 1st. there are
systems in which these vessels are distributed in great quantity,
and in which consequently the general capillary system contains much
blood; such are the glandular, the mucous, the cutaneous, the animal
and organic muscular, &c. 2d. Other systems receive but few arteries,
as the osseous, the fibrous, the serous, &c. and consequently have but
little blood in circulation in that portion of the general capillary
system that belongs to them. 3d. Finally the pilous, epidermoid,
cartilaginous systems, &c. destitute of arteries, contain only white
fluids in the division of the general capillary system that has its
seat in them.


ARTICLE THIRD.

ORGANIZATION OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.


I. _Textures peculiar to this organization._

The red blood circulates, as I have said, in a membrane arranged in
the shape of a great canal, variable in its form, extended from the
pulmonary capillary system to the general one, and having every where
the greatest analogy. At the exterior of this membrane, nature has
added a fibrous coat for the arteries, fleshy fibres for the heart, and
a peculiar membrane for the pulmonary veins. I shall speak here only
of the arterial coat. The fibres of the heart and the membrane of the
pulmonary veins will be examined, one in the organic muscular system,
the other in the system with black blood. As to the internal membrane
of the arteries, which is also that of the whole system with red
blood, we shall examine it in a general manner.


_Peculiar Membrane of the Arteries._

This membrane is firm, compact, very apparent in the great arteries,
less evident in the last divisions where it is insensibly lost. Its
colour is usually every where the same. If the branches appear red
in living animals, and the trunks yellowish, it arises only from the
transparency of the one which allows the blood to be seen, and the
opacity of the others. The colour of the arterial fibre is yellowish.
However it assumes in certain cases a greyish appearance. I have often
observed in arteries exposed to maceration, that it reddens in a very
evident manner at the end of some days, or rather that it takes a rosy
tinge, very analogous to that of the cartilages of the fœtus and of
the fibro-cartilages of the adult, submitted to the same experiment.
This result is however less uniform in the arteries than in those two
systems, in which it is never absent. Sometimes the internal membrane
reddens also, but never the external or cellular; on the contrary, the
longer this remains in water the whiter it becomes. When the fibrous
coat of the arteries has continued some time with this redness, it
gradually loses it, if maceration is continued. This phenomenon is
often more evident in the branches than in the trunks. For example,
the arteries at the base of the cranium become red very frequently
in the dead body, by remaining in the fluids with which this part is
moistened. We see, in opening the cranium, this redness which does not
belong to the blood left in the arterial cavities, as we may be easily
convinced.

The thickness of the peculiar membrane of the arteries is very evident
in the great trunks. It constantly diminishes; a circumstance that
distinguishes it essentially from the internal membrane, which I have
found almost as thick in the tibial artery as in the aorta. It has
been thought that in certain arteries, as in the cerebral, the fibrous
coat is entirely wanting. There is no doubt that in the vertebral and
internal carotid it is thinner in proportion than in equal trunks
situated in the muscular interstices; but by examining attentively
these arteries, I have clearly distinguished circular fibres in them.
Has the thinness of their parietes an influence upon the sanguineous
effusions, which are, as we know, so frequent in the brain? I cannot
say. These effusions take place only in the capillaries, the trunks
are never the seats of them; now it is impossible to examine these
capillaries. I have sought in vain to ascertain by injections the
vessels torn in apoplexy. Besides, this hemorrhage does not resemble
that of the serous membranes; it is not an oozing through the exhalants
of the ventricles; for these cavities are very rarely the only seat
of it. Almost always these effusions take place even in the cerebral
substance, generally nearer the posterior than the anterior lobe. The
cerebellum is rarely affected by it. When the tuber annulare becomes
so, there are often small partial effusions there, separated by
medullary partitions that remain uninjured.

As to the arteries of the other parts of the body, their peculiar
membrane presents generally a pretty uniform arrangement. It has
appeared to me however, that in the interior of the viscera, of the
liver, of the spleen, it is rather thinner than in the intermuscular
spaces, and even than in the muscles.

This membrane is composed of very distinct fibres, adhering to each
other, easily separated however, arranged in layers, in such a manner
that after having raised the cellular covering, we can without
difficulty separate these different layers from each other; it is
this that has made many authors believe that the great arteries were
composed of a great number of coats. The fibres that form these layers
are circular or nearly so; the external ones appear to be attached to
the compact cellular texture that is contiguous. In fact, by raising
this, a number more or less considerable adheres to it always in an
intimate manner. As to the internal membrane, it does not appear to
furnish any attachment; we raise it easily, without bringing with it
any arterial fibres. The manner of the adhesion of these fibres with
the compact neighbouring texture, appears to me to have great analogy
with the origin of the organic muscular fibres, which are attached in a
great number of places, to the sub-mucous texture.

When a branch arises from a trunk, the circular fibres of the last
separate and form on each side a half ring, whence arises a complete
one, which embraces the small rings formed by the circular fibres of
the arising branch. These circular fibres go even to the eminence of
the common membrane, which is seen within the arterial cavity and
of which I have spoken; so that the whole thickness of the peculiar
membrane serves as a support to their origin. But there is but little
continuity between the two kinds of fibres. Those of the branch do not
arise from those of the trunk; it is the internal membrane that serves
to fix them together, as fibres of communication. Dissection shows
easily these branches set at their origin in the ring which arises from
the separation of the circular fibres. We remark this at the origin
of the intercostals and lumbars upon the aorta, &c. When two trunks
of an equal size go off, as the iliacs, the last circular fibres of
the primitive trunk which they formed, interlace intimately with the
origin of each of the two circular layers, that arise at the fork that
separates this origin. Thus the last rings of the aorta cannot be
separated from the first of each iliac.

There are no longitudinal fibres in the arteries.

What is the nature of the arterial fibre? Almost all anatomists have
considered it the same with the muscular. But if we examine them
attentively, it is easy to be convinced of their differences. The
want of red colour does not establish these differences, since in man
even, some parts really muscular, as the intestines, want this colour.
But the muscular texture is soft, loose and very extensible; the
arterial texture on the contrary is firm and solid, breaks before it
yields. We can observe this, by tying an artery tight. The two internal
coats are cut; the cellular alone is not, though the ligature is
immediately applied to it; we observe, by opening the artery, a section
corresponding with the thread, exactly similar to what a cutting
instrument would have made.

I have often repeated this experiment, pointed out by Desault, upon
the dead body, and upon living animals; the result which is very
uniform, explains the frequency of hemorrhages after the operation for
aneurism. There is undoubtedly no texture so brittle, if I may use the
word, as the arterial, none consequently less proper to be embraced by
ligatures. Why is it that this should be the only one in which it is
necessary to apply them? This phenomenon alone would distinguish the
arterial texture from the muscular. In fact, the preceding experiment,
made upon a portion of intestine in which the fibres are arranged like
the arterial, would produce a flattening, an approximation of these
fibres, but would not cut them.

Moreover compare the properties of texture of the arteries with
those of the muscles; compare their vital properties, by examining
the articles in which I treat of these properties; compare their
development, and especially the different morbid alterations to which
the two are subject, and you will see that there is not a single
relation in which they have the least analogy. The aneurism of the
heart and that of the arteries have nothing in common but the name.
In one there is a rupture of the arterial fibres, a dilatation of the
cellular coat; in the other an unnatural increase, a real development
of muscular fibres which preserve their appearance and their
properties.

Notwithstanding the ease with which the arterial fibres are broken in
cases of aneurism, they enjoy in a natural state a very considerable
degree of resistance and force; another character that distinguishes
them from the fleshy texture. The following are the proofs of this
resistance, which takes place both transversely and longitudinally.
1st. If we tie the carotid artery above, and drive a fluid afterwards
into it, great force must be employed to break its texture. The same
thing happens when we force in air instead of a liquid. Frequently
the efforts of a man are insufficient to produce a rupture; thus the
force of the heart can never cause it suddenly; so that the formation
of aneurisms takes place only from the long continued action upon the
arterial parietes; I doubt whether these tumours can be formed, without
a previous alteration of the arterial texture, by the force of the
impulse of the blood alone against the weak parietes of the arteries.
2d. The resistance of these parietes takes place longitudinally also.
If we draw in a contrary direction, the two ends of an artery and of a
muscle, we effect with more difficulty the rupture of the first, when
the dead body is the subject of this comparative experiment. But upon
the living the effect is opposite; the vessel yields to a very strong
action made upon it; it would be necessary that this action should
be incomparably greater to divide the muscle. This difference arises
evidently from the vital properties of the latter, which in this case
contracts violently, whilst the artery can make no further resistance
than from the nature of its texture. Besides, this longitudinal
resistance to distension is less than the lateral resistance opposed to
the injection; experiments prove it, and it arises without doubt from
this, that no fibre, in the first case, is found directly opposed to
the effort.

This resistance of the arterial texture, so different from that of
the venous, is a necessary consequence of the situation of the heart
at the origin of the arteries. In fact, this organ driving the blood
with force into their tubes, should find there a force capable of
resisting the greatest efforts of which it is susceptible, when its
sensible organic contractility is raised to a high point. This is the
great advantage of the arterial texture. What would become of the
circulation and all the functions that depended upon it, if the least
cause which increased the force of the blood could dilate the parietes
of the arteries beyond the ordinary degree? It was necessary that their
texture should render these parietes independent of the different
degrees of motion of the fluid that circulates in them; whence it
follows that a fleshy heart and resisting arteries are two things
inevitably connected. If nature had doubled the energy of the heart,
she would have doubled also the arterial resistance. On the other hand,
they would have had but little resistance, if there had not been an
agent of impulse at their origin; this is precisely what happens in
the hepatic portion of the vena porta, which by its distribution is
analogous to the arteries. Why is the pulmonary artery thinner and
less resisting than the aorta? Because the right ventricle being less
fleshy, is not capable of so great efforts.

From what has been said, it appears, that the external arterial
membrane resembles the fibrous organs, which, as we shall see, are
characterized by an extreme resistance. But if we observe on the other
hand that this membrane can be broken, raised by layers and scales in
dissection, that it is elastic and even dry, if I may so say, whilst
the fibrous organs are compact, form a solid body, resisting, but
softer and more elastic, we shall be convinced that this external
membrane is exclusively peculiar to the arteries; that it has no
relation with the other systems, but forms a distinct and separate
texture in the economy. The structure with regular fibres, is the only
circumstance that can, in my opinion, make us believe in the muscular
nature of the arteries; but the ligaments and tendons are fibrous
also; of what importance are the forms to the intimate nature? Now,
can we say that this nature is the same, when the physical properties,
when the extensibility and contractility of texture, when the vital
sensibility and contractility are different?

Besides, the action of different re-agents upon the arterial texture,
proves clearly how much it differs from the muscular. There are then
general phenomena common to all the solids; but different peculiar
phenomena that are distinctive. We may satisfy ourselves of this, by
comparing the following article with that which corresponds with it in
the muscular system.


_Action of different agents upon the arterial texture._

The action of the air by drying the arteries gives them a colour of
a reddish yellow, very deep and even blackish in the great trunks,
more clear in the smaller ones. Thus dried, the arterial texture
is almost as hard as the cartilages in the same state, extremely
brittle, breaking in the great trunks with a crackling noise, that is
not perceived in any other animal texture. It is especially in this
preparation, that we see how much the cellular covering of the arteries
differs from their peculiar texture. This covering remains pliable;
it is whitish when raised up separately. Immersed again in water, the
arteries assume in part their natural arrangement.

In drying, the arterial texture loses but very little of its thickness;
this is a phenomenon that distinguishes it from most of the other
textures. It arises from the small quantity of fluid that is contained
between its layers, a circumstance that appears to be owing to the
absence of the cellular texture. In opening the arterial layers, the
kind of dryness they exhibit is remarkable, when compared with the
moisture in which the muscular fibres are immersed.

Exposed wet among other organs to the action of the air, the arteries
putrefy with great difficulty. Their texture resembles in this respect
that of the cartilages, the fibro-cartilages, &c.; it is like them for
some time almost incorruptible; when it is left to putrefy by itself,
it gives out an odour much less fœtid than that of other textures;
there appears to be less ammonia disengaged from it. The absence of
fœtor is also very remarkable in the water in which the arteries have
been macerated, entirely separated from every neighbouring texture. By
comparing this water with that in which muscles have been macerated,
the difference is striking. An evident proof of the resistance of the
arteries to putrefaction and maceration, is what is observed in the
viscera, which have been a long time macerated or which are putrid,
as in the liver, the spleen, the kidnies, &c. In both cases, in the
first especially, these viscera are reduced to a kind of pulp; the
arteries however have preserved their texture still hard, amid this
general softening. By removing carefully the putrid substance, we can
follow them even to their final ramifications. This method of seeing
the arteries is easy, whether they are filled by injection, or left
empty. In the living animal, these vessels are also infinitely less
susceptible of putrefaction than the skin, the cellular texture, &c.
An artery often passes through a mortified part without undergoing any
alteration from it; this is frequently seen in gun-shot wounds.

At the end of a period, very different according to the degree of
temperature, the arterial texture yields finally to maceration
and putrefaction. In the first case, it softens gradually without
changing colour, loses the adhesion of its fibres, and is ultimately
resolved into a pulp almost homogeneous and greyish. In the second
case, it becomes greyish at first, then is reduced also to a pulp,
and when all the fluid part is evaporated, there is left a kind of
coal wholly different from that which remains after the putrefaction
of the muscles. In general, it requires much longer time to soften
the arterial texture by maceration than by putrefaction; which shows
the superiority of the action of the air over that of water, in the
production of this phenomenon.

Exposed to the contact of caloric, the arterial texture curls up,
contracts and exhibits the horny hardening in the highest degree.
If the action of water is added to that of caloric, which produces
boiling, the following is the result of it. 1st. Very little froth
rises before ebullition, from the vessel that contains the arterial
texture; we might say that this texture and the muscular present in
this respect, two opposite phenomena in the economy; the small quantity
of froth that arises from the first, is greyish. 2d. At the moment
of ebullition, there is an evident horny hardening, less however
than that of the nervous texture, more sensible in the direction of
the diameters than in that of the axis; a hardening accompanying
this horny hardening, and a yellowish tinge of the liquor. 3d. This
state continues for half an hour or more, ebullition constantly going
on. 4th. Successive softening; but at the same time a greyish tinge
succeeding to the yellow colour; want of adhesion among the fibres,
increasing as the ebullition goes on, so that they break with great
ease. 5th. However prolonged may be the ebullition, the arterial
texture is never reduced, like the fibrous, the cartilaginous, &c. to
a gelatinous and yellowish pulp. The fibres remain as they are, in the
same relation, with the same size, &c. The want of adhesion and the
change of colour are almost the only phenomena they experience. 5th.
The broth, produced by the boiling, is insipid and tasteless, a proof
how few neutral salts the arterial texture contains.

The action of the concentrated acids curls this texture, afterwards
softens it, finally dissolves it in the form of a pulp, yellowish by
the nitric, and blackish by the sulphuric.

Most of the others have a less sensible action than these two. When
they are diluted, there is no horny hardening at the moment the artery
is immersed in them; but its texture is gradually softened, and can be
broken with the least effort, as after boiling. It is never reduced to
a fluid state, how long soever it may continue in the acid.

The alkalies, even the caustic, have but little action upon the
arterial texture; immersed a long time in them, this texture remains
almost untouched, loses but little by solution, cannot be broken as it
can after being in the diluted acids, &c.


_Membrane common to the system with Red Blood._

I call that the common membrane which lines the arteries, the left side
of the heart and the pulmonary veins. It can be dissected with ease
upon these two last organs. To separate it from the arteries, it is
necessary to cut through by a very superficial circular section, the
external fibrous layer, raise this layer by laminæ from below upwards;
we come then to the internal membrane, which adheres but little to the
preceding, and can be detached from it in the form of a canal, of very
great extent. It is distinct from it, 1st. by its extreme tenuity, and
the transparency that results from it; 2d. by its white colour; for
it appears yellow only by being applied to the preceding; 3d. by the
entire want of fibres. It is smooth and with a uniform texture like
the serous membranes, which we may be convinced of by holding it up
to the light. Besides, it differs essentially from these membranes by
a kind of brittleness that characterizes it; it is broken and torn by
the least effort. The whole resistance of the arteries resides in their
fibrous coat.

It appears that this membrane, though every where connected, has
however some differences of structure in the different regions. 1st.
It is evidently more delicate in the interior of the ventricle with
red blood, than in the corresponding auricle and in the arteries. 2d.
It yields in the heart and in the pulmonary veins, to dilatations much
greater than those of which it is susceptible in the arteries, in which
it would inevitably break, like the proper membrane, if the blood could
produce as great differences of size in it, as it does in these organs.
3d. When we macerate the heart for some time, this internal membrane
acquires in the auricle and upon the mitral valves, a very remarkable
whiteness, and which is foreign to it in all the rest of its course.
4th. As to the action of the different agents, of the air, of water, of
caloric, &c. it appears to me to be the same every where, and resembles
precisely that upon the peculiar membrane. Only I have thought, that
in the small arteries, the common membrane has the horny hardness more
than this, which on this account wrinkles on the interior in different
places, when a whole branch is immersed in boiling water; this does not
take place in the great trunks.

It is evident from this, that though the common membrane of red blood,
is every where continuous, it is not uniform in its structure; we
shall have occasion to make an analogous observation for the different
portions of the two general mucous surfaces.

The internal surface of this membrane is moistened in the dead body, by
an unctuous fluid, that is found in greater or less quantity. Does this
fluid exist in the living? does it serve to defend the arterial coat
from the impression of the blood? It is difficult to determine. We know
of no organ fitted to furnish it; it would arise from the exhalants,
if its existence, as many authors have admitted, was real. It would
be well to ascertain as to its existence, whether it was merely a
transudation after death, analogous to that of the bile through the
gall bladder, or the consequence of a little serum remaining in the
arteries after the expulsion of the blood. What makes me suspect so
is, that these arteries being deprived of blood, contract intimate
adhesions on their internal surface; which their fluid ought to
prevent, as that of the mucous tubes does, which should they cease to
transmit their respective substances, as the excrements for example,
the secreted fluids, &c. would never be obliterated because of this
fluid.

It appears then that it is the membrane itself, and not a fluid that
escapes from it, which serves to protect the artery; it can, in this
point of view, be considered in relation to the blood, as a kind of
epidermis. It is this, which by its folds contributes especially to
form the aortic and mitral valves, and the different eminences at the
origin of the branches, smaller branches, &c. The external surface,
feebly united to the other membrane as we have seen, has not an
intermediate cellular one. Notwithstanding this slight adhesion, no
means, boiling water, maceration, putrefaction, &c. can detach one of
these membranes from the other, as takes place in the periosteum from
the bone, which, are naturally much stronger united; it requires always
the aid of dissection.

What is the nature of this common membrane? I am entirely ignorant;
though with a different appearance it has the greatest analogy with
the preceding coat, in its properties. We cannot class them in any
system. They form a separate texture in the economy, a texture that has
properties entirely distinct.

When we dry the common membrane of the arteries by itself, it is
infinitely more pliable than the other. It remains transparent, the
other does not. As to the phenomena of the other re-agents, except the
horny hardening, they are nearly the same.

This membrane is remarkable, in all the organic systems, for the
singular tendency it has of being ossified in old age. I have been able
to satisfy myself, that out of ten subjects, there are at least seven
that have incrustations after the sixtieth year. These incrustations,
having no connexion with the peculiar fibrous membrane, begin uniformly
on the external surface of this, the most external part of which they
attack; for there always remains over the incrustation a kind of
pellicle that separates it from the blood, and which belongs to the
membrane; the earthy substance is never immediately in contact with
this fluid.

These incrustations do not follow any of the laws of ordinary
ossification. The cartilaginous state rarely precedes them. The saline
substance is deposited immediately upon the exterior of the common
membrane by the exhalants. It is always in separate plates, more or
less broad, that this exhalation is made; rarely the whole of the
artery forms a solid continuous tube; so that the membranous portions
remaining between the plates can be considered as serving for articular
connexions, and that the arteries, thus ossified, are composed of many
pieces moveable upon each other, and being able to a certain extent to
adapt themselves to the circulating motion.

As long as these plates remain thin, the interior of the artery is as
usual smooth and polished. But if many saline substances are deposited
there, they then have a greater thickness and make a projection within.
The fine pellicle that covers them and which is continued upon the
artery, is broken; then they adhere only by their external surface
to the peculiar membrane. Their circumference is unequal and rough.
If there is a great number in the artery, the whole internal surface
presents numerous asperities, produced by the rupture of this extremely
fine layer of the common membrane that covers the osseous plates. This
arrangement is particularly remarkable at the origin and even in the
course of the aorta. I have noticed it frequently in the dissecting
rooms. Since I have practised medicine in the hospitals, I have already
opened three or four subjects that have exhibited this arrangement, in
which the heart was perfectly untouched, but who died however with most
of the symptoms that accompany diseases of that organ. The rupture of
the fine pellicle when the osseous plates become large, arises from the
remarkable brittleness that we have observed in the common membrane,
of which it is an appendage. I have never seen these osseous plates
entirely detached, and become loose in the artery.

All the parts of the arterial system are subject to ossification. It
appears as frequent in the branches as in the trunks. We know how
common it is to find the radial ossified, in feeling the pulse of an
old person. The ramifications appear to be less frequently the seat of
these incrustations, which never take place in the capillary system; a
circumstance that would induce me to believe that the common membrane
of the arteries does not extend to this system, but that it changes
gradually into a different texture.

It is not only in the arteries that the common membrane of the system
with red blood is penetrated with saline substance; this often happens
to it in the heart, especially in the aortic and mitral valves. It is
more rare upon the internal surface of the left ventricle and auricle
and the pulmonary veins. I have had however examples of these last.
This general disposition to ossification in its whole course, proves
that its nature is every where the same, and that notwithstanding the
differences pointed out, I have had reason to consider it in an uniform
manner, from the pulmonary capillary system to the general; for as I
have already observed, an identity of diseases supposes an identity of
nature. It is the frequency of ossifications of this membrane in the
heart of old people, which renders extremely frequent the intermission
of the pulse at that age. The ossification of the origin of the aorta
has an influence also upon the circulation, as I have ascertained;
but that of the trunks, branches, &c. does not produce the least
derangement.

The ossification of the common membrane of the system with red blood
differs essentially from those that happen in other parts, in this,
that it is, if we may so say, a natural phenomenon, whereas the others
are accidental and often preceded by inflammation and engorgement.
Thus these ossifications do not follow the progress of age; they
happen in young people and in adults, as often as in old ones. Before
old age, the ossifications of this membrane are observed also, but
infinitely more rarely than at this age. The diseases of the heart
which the ossification of the mitral valves accompanies and often alone
constitutes, are a remarkable proof of this. A phenomenon has struck
me many times upon this subject; such an ossification as an old man
can live with very well, and which only makes his pulse intermittent,
produces in the adult the most serious consequences. I have already
opened many subjects, who had been affected with difficulty of
breathing, frequent suffocation, cough, irregularity of the pulse,
necessity of an erect position of the trunk, and in the later periods,
infiltration, serous effusion in the thorax, spitting of blood, &c.
and in whom I have found only ossification of the mitral valves, less
than we see every day in the bodies of old people in our dissecting
rooms. I confess that even this natural disposition to ossification in
the common membrane of the system with red blood, had made me think
that they had exaggerated a little the cases in which this ossification
becomes, in the adult and even in the old man, when it is very strongly
marked, the cause of that series of phenomena, whose assemblage forms
the asthma of most physicians. But the practice of the Hôtel Dieu shows
me every day, that these cases of ossifications, those of aneurisms
and those of other organic affections of which the heart is the seat,
form a class of chronic diseases almost as numerous as that of the
chronic diseases of the lungs, to which generally were referred all the
diseases of the chest, before the time of Corvisart.


II. _Parts common to the organization of the Vascular System with Red
Blood._


_Blood Vessels._

The parietes of the arteries contain secondary arteries destined
to their nutrition. These arteries come usually from neighbouring
branches, sometimes from the artery itself, whose capillary divisions
terminate in the texture of its parietes. The heart exhibits this
arrangement. At its exit, the aorta sends off the coronaries which
are spread upon the texture of this organ and upon the origin of this
artery itself. The bronchials furnish the parietes of the pulmonary
veins. In the arterial texture, in which it is especially necessary to
examine the little arteries, they wind at first in the cellular texture
exterior to the artery, they ramify there in a thousand ways, send some
divisions to the neighbouring organs, but furnish a great number that
penetrate the peculiar membrane, are interposed between its layers,
leave filaments there and terminate before they arrive at the internal
membrane. I have never seen, either by injections, or by opening in a
living animal an artery in which I had first stopt the course of the
blood above and below, as for example, the carotid, I have never seen,
I say, the little arteries penetrating even to this internal membrane.
To distinguish well without injections, the vessels of the arteries, it
is necessary to choose on one hand a great trunk like the aorta, and
on the other to take this trunk in a young animal that has been killed
for the purpose by asphyxia; all the little arteries then are perfectly
injected with a very black blood. Examine the arteries of the fœtus,
especially if it has died by asphyxia at birth, you will be struck with
the great abundance of blood vessels that its great arteries contain
and which are sometimes as livid as in asphyxia.

The veins accompany every where the little arteries in the parietes of
the arterial trunks, they follow nearly the same distribution. I have
not seen them become varicose in the parietes of aneurismatic arteries,
in as evident a manner, as in the tumours of many other textures of the
animal economy.


_Cellular Texture._

The arteries have around them two kinds of cellular texture; one, which
is very external, loose, fatty, full of serum, with distinct layers,
unites them to the neighbouring parts, favours their motions, is in no
way distinct from the rest of the cellular system; the other, firm,
compact, not fatty, filamentous and not lamellated, forms the first of
their coats. We have spoken in treating of the cellular system, of this
particular layer that covers the arteries, which authors commonly call
the cellular coat, which the ancients called nervous, on account of its
whiteness, and which, analogous in every respect to the sub-mucous,
sub-excretory cellular texture, &c. differs essentially from the
preceding, as it differs from that which is in the interior, around or
in the interstices of the organs.

These two kinds of cellular texture, the last especially, contribute to
support the folds of the arteries; as when we have carefully dissected
the peculiar coat, these folds entirely disappear. However when they
are on one hand strongly marked, and on the other, are not subject
frequently to disappear in yielding to the elongation of the parts, as
in the internal carotid in its canal, I have observed that the arterial
fibres are accommodated to these folds; that the fibres are more
numerous on the convex side, than on the other, so that the thickness
of the artery is exactly uniform, which it would not be without this
inequality; for being more pressed on the concave side, these fibres
would make the artery thicker at that place.

The cellular texture forms the first membrane of the arteries, and
gives as we have seen insertions to the arterial fibres, but it does
not extend into the interstices of these fibres; it is this that
distinguishes essentially the layers of the arterial texture, from
those of the muscular, venous textures, &c. I have never been able to
discover the cellular texture there by any means that I could employ.
Maceration, of which Haller has said so much, does not show any thing
like it. When at the end of a very long time, the arteries finally
yield to it, they exhibit only a kind of pulp, in which there is no
cellular appearance.

In general, the resolution of the organs into cellular texture by
maceration, exhibits a phenomenon much less extensive than is generally
thought. It is the organic texture itself that forms the kind of pulp
that is then obtained. As this texture varies in each system, the
pulp of these systems, a long time macerated, varies equally; this
undoubtedly would not happen, if, as Haller has advanced, the cellular
texture was the only base, to which all the organs are brought by
maceration. But let us return to the arteries.

Not only their fibres are not formed of cellular texture; but as I have
said, they do not contain it in their interstices, a character in which
it differs from all the other systems. The most careful dissection
does not show it. When we separate the fibres from each other, we see,
either that they are merely in apposition, or that they are held by
little elongations of the same nature as themselves. I have said that
this absence of the cellular texture is observable between the proper
and common membranes of the arteries, though Haller has pretended the
contrary.

I believe that this absence of cellular texture contributes much to
the kind of brittleness that particularly distinguishes the arterial
texture, and which, as I have observed, renders it the least fit of
all the animal textures, to support ligatures without breaking. It is
to this circumstance also that must be referred the difficulty, the
impossibility even of arterial dilatations, of the formation of cysts
by the parieties of arteries. There are never, we know, true aneurisms;
when these tumours increase at all, the two membranes of the artery
break and the cellular coat alone is dilated. Hence the necessity of
the peculiar structure which distinguishes the cellular texture placed
around the arteries, and gives it a resistance that it has not in most
other parts. Authors are astonished at these ruptures which distinguish
the dilatations of the arteries from those of all the other systems. If
they had compared the texture of the arteries with that of the other
systems they would have seen the reason of this difference.

We easily understand, after what has been said, why there is never fat
in the arterial texture; why it is never infiltrated in dropsies; why
it does not develop hydatids and cysts in its layers, why the different
tumours, for which the cellular texture serves as a base, as we have
seen, do not appear in the arteries, &c. When an artery has been
wounded, either longitudinally or transversely, we do not see fleshy
granulations arise from the edges of the wound; I do not know that
surgeons have seen them in the operations for aneurisms. Never, in the
numerous cases in which I have had occasion to cut the arteries, in
animals, and then leave them free, after having interrupted the course
of the blood, have I observed any thing like it. If an arterial trunk
is laid bare, the cellular coat often furnishes these granulations; but
we never see them, if this coat is removed.


_Exhalants and Absorbents._

Are there exhalants in the arteries? Nutrition undoubtedly supposes
them; but it is not probable, as I have said, that they open upon their
internal surface.

As to the absorbents, I thought for some time, that the absence of
blood in the arteries, after death, arises from this, that their
lymphatics preserving still the absorbent faculty for some time, take
up the serum which is separated from the crassamentum. But lately
experiments have undeceived me. I have enclosed blood, water, the fluid
of dropsies, &c. between two ligatures made above and below on the
common carotid, the body of which had been so managed on the exterior
as not to break the vessels that come to it. At the expiration of a
considerable time I have not discovered any diminution in the fluid.
There had been then no absorption. I would observe that on account of
the want of collateral branches, the carotid is alone proper for these
experiments, and a variety of other analogous ones.

We know that the absorbents abound where there is cellular texture, and
that they are wanting usually where there is none. It is probable then
that the absence of this texture produces also the absence of these
vessels.


_Nerves._

1st. The first tree of the system with red blood, receives almost
exclusively cerebral nerves. We know in fact, that the par vagum is
spread upon all the pulmonary veins, as well as upon the neighbouring
vessels of the lungs, which hardly receive any from the inferior
cervical ganglion. 2d. The middle portion of this system, that in which
the heart is found, derives its nerves almost as much and even more,
from the ganglions, than from the brain. 3d. The great tree with red
blood, or the arterial, is almost exclusively embraced by the first
class of nerves. We have said how these nerves go in this respect.
The cerebral which accompany them, furnish hardly any filaments to
the arteries. There is merely juxta position as we see it in the
extremities, in the intercostal spaces, &c.

I cannot repeat it too much, that the constant relation of the arteries
with the nervous system of the ganglions, deserves the attention of
physiologists, because it is too general not to belong to some great
object of the functions of the economy, though the object may be
unknown.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

PROPERTIES OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.

What we have to say of these properties, will refer particularly to the
arteries, as well as what we have said of the organization. In fact the
fleshy parietes of the heart and the membranous ones of the pulmonary
veins, possess properties that will be examined hereafter, and which
differ from those of the arteries, on account of the difference of
texture. As to those of the common membrane they are nearly the same in
the whole course of the red blood, the organization differing but very
little.

I shall consider the properties of the arteries only in the arterial
texture and in the common membrane; for the cellular coat belonging to
the system of that name, partakes of all its properties.


I. _Physical Properties._

Elasticity, which is obscure in most of the other animal textures that
are characterized by a great degree of softness is very remarkable in
the arteries; it is this that particularly distinguishes them from the
veins. This elasticity keeps their parietes apart, though they may be
empty. These tubes, with the cartilaginous, as the trachea, the meatus
auditorius of the fœtus, &c. which are equally endowed with elasticity,
are the only ones that keep thus open of themselves. All the others
have their parietes applied to each other, when the fluid that runs
through them does not distend these parietes.

It is to the elasticity of the arterial parietes that must be referred
their recovering themselves when they have been flattened so as to
obliterate their cavity, the sudden straightening of an arterial tube
that has been bent, &c.

This property takes also an evident part in that kind of locomotion
the arteries have upon the entrance of the blood. In fact, lay bare a
tortuous arterial trunk in a living animal, you see the whole of it
rise at each pulsation, leave the place it occupied, and straighten
itself, particularly at its curves. At the moment the injection
penetrates a very thin small subject, we perceive also through the
integuments, a locomotion of all the tortuous branches of the face.
Now it is evident that if the arteries were not of a firm and elastic
texture, they would not thus obey the motion that is impressed upon
them; besides, observe what takes place in the injection of the
abdominal branches of the vena porta, which having no valves can be
injected like arteries. Nothing similar to the locomotion of which I
spoke is observed in driving the fluid into them. I have often made
arterial blood circulate in the veins by the means of curved tubes,
fitted to the vessels of a living animal, for example, by making the
carotid and external jugular communicate; now, we observe clearly in
the veins carrying the red blood, a kind of pulsation synchronous with
the beating of the heart, and a distinct rustling noise, but not a real
locomotion.

The locomotion of the arteries supposes three things, 1st, an agent
of impulse, that communicates a motion more or less strong, to the
blood contained in their interior; 2d, a tortuous arrangement which
allows the blood in striking their parietes to straighten them; 3d,
the firmness and elasticity of these parietes which facilitate this
straightening. On the other hand, the parietes must not be too firm;
thus the cartilaginous texture would be improper for this locomotion.

The elasticity of the arteries is as striking after death as during
life; it is essential to distinguish it from contractility of texture.
There are many distinctive characters, the following are the most
striking; 1st. The contractility of texture takes place only when
there is a want of extension of the arterial parietes, that is to say,
when these vessels cease to contain the blood which resists their
contraction, or when they are cut and afterwards left to themselves.
On the contrary, elasticity requires for its exercise, a previous
compression and is manifested by the sudden return of the parts to
their natural state. 2d. Contractility of texture has a permanent
tendency to contraction; we may say that all the parts that possess
it are in a forced state; so that as soon as this state ceases,
contraction takes place. On the contrary, elasticity has not this
constant tendency to exercise. 3d. Every elastic motion is brisk,
sudden, as quick to stop as to begin. On the contrary, every motion
of contractility of texture is insensible, slow, continues often many
hours and even days, as we see it in the retraction of amputated
muscles, &c. 4th. Every organ in which there is contractility of
texture, enjoys necessarily extensibility. On the contrary, this last
property is not necessarily connected with elasticity, as we observe it
in the cartilages of animals, &c. 5th. Elasticity is purely a physical
property. Contractility of texture, without being vital, is only
inherent in the organs of animals.


II. _Properties of texture. Extensibility._

The extensibility of the arteries may be considered, 1st, transversely;
2d, longitudinally.

The arteries have but little extensibility in the direction of their
diameter. 1st. Whatever efforts are made to dilate them by injections
of water, air, fat substances, &c. their caliber is rendered but little
larger than natural. 2d. I have said that their texture is remarkable
by a kind of brittleness, that when the blood distends them a little in
aneurisms, this texture breaks instead of yielding, and that it is only
the cellular coat, which, by the extensibility it has from the system
from which it is derived, that is fitted to form the cyst that contains
the blood. It is this that essentially distinguishes aneurismal from
varicose tumours. 3d. If we tie superiorly the carotid artery of a
dog, the blood pushed against the ligature that stops its course,
reacts violently upon the parietes and yet the dilatation is hardly
perceptible. We must not think however that the arteries do not yield
at all. When the dilating cause acts slowly, it produces its effect
to a certain determinate point, beyond which rupture takes place. The
proof of this, is in the dilatation of the arch of the aorta, in that
which true aneurisms present in their early stages, &c.

Longitudinally, the arteries are more capable of stretching, than
they are transversely. We may be convinced of this, by drawing out
these vessels, to place a ligature upon them in an amputated stump.
By cutting upon a dead body a portion of artery, and drawing it in a
contrary direction, it is evidently elongated. It is necessary in these
experiments, to pay attention to the development of the folds. In fact,
I have said, that this development of the folds performs a principal
part in the elongation of the arteries situated in the parts that are
dilated.

It is evident that in the extensibility in a transverse direction, it
is the circular fibres of the peculiar membrane that especially resist;
that on the contrary, in the extensibility in a longitudinal direction,
it is the common membrane that opposes the resistance, since there are
no longitudinal fibres. It is not astonishing then that the first kind
of extensibility should be less evident than the second.


_Contractility._

It is necessary to consider it in a transverse and in a longitudinal
direction.

Considered in the first point of view, contractility is much more
evident than extensibility. When the artery is no longer distended with
blood, it contracts in a sensible manner. It is to this contraction,
that the following phenomena must be referred; 1st. the umbilical
artery and the ductus arteriosus, become like ligaments after birth,
by the adhesion of their parietes which are contracted. 2d. If we
make a ligature upon an artery, the whole portion comprised between
this ligature and the first collateral branch, soon exhibits the same
phenomenon, as is proved by the operation for aneurism. 3d. If we
include a portion of the carotid between two ligatures, and afterwards
empty it by a puncture, it suddenly loses half its caliber. 4th. In
dogs in whom I have transfused blood in order to produce artificial
plethora, I have observed the arteries to be almost double in diameter,
to what they are in those of the same size, who had suffered great
hemorrhage. Two animals of the same size, one killed by hemorrhage the
other by asphyxia, exhibit the same difference. 5th. These experiments
shew me satisfactorily the cause of a large and small pulse, a cause
admitted moreover by most physiologists. The artery is certainly more
or less large, according to the quantity of blood that fills it. There
is a point of extension that it cannot pass; but it contracts often
for the want of blood, so as to be as it were, but a mere thread. 6th.
Though you may have opened but few bodies, you have no doubt been
astonished, that in those of the same size, the arteries have often
very different diameters. This arises wholly from what takes place at
the moment of death. If, from the want of blood, the arteries are for
a long time contracted, they remain in this state, as happens to the
heart in death by hemorrhage, &c. This is so true, that arteries of
different diameters commonly become equal by injection, which brings
them to an uniform degree of extension that they cannot pass. 7th. In
a longitudinal wound of arteries the ends of their cut fibrous circles
separating from each other, a space, which does not close, is left
between them.

Most authors have confounded contractility of texture of the arteries
with irritability. I have no occasion here to show how much they are
deceived. In none of the preceding cases, is it necessary that a
stimulant should be applied upon the arterial texture; the only thing
necessary is the absence of extension, a distinctive character of the
contractility of texture. Moreover it is evident, that this property
continues after death, though in a less degree than during life;
whereas some hours after death, every kind of irritability disappears.
I think that it is especially in the arterial system, that may be seen
the advantage of my division of the properties of our organs. Read
all the authors upon this system, and you will see that no one is
intelligible, because they have not assigned the limits of the vital
properties and those of texture.

Contractility of texture in the longitudinal direction, is in
proportion less evident than in the transverse; it is however real.
1st. Thus when we cut an artery between two ligatures, the two ends
retract immediately in an opposite direction. 2d. This retraction
is evident in amputation; that of the muscles and the skin however
is greater, the artery often projects a little. 3d. An artery, cut
transversely in a portion of its parietes, often presents at this
place a broad opening, arising from the retraction of the cut parts,
as happens in a longitudinal wound of which I spoke just now. 4th.
When we draw an artery forcibly and suddenly let it go, its retraction
is very evident. In making this experiment upon an animal, the vessel
buries itself in the flesh. Hence why, the spermatic artery and cord,
drawn down by the weight of the testicle, often ascend into the abdomen
after it is removed, if care is not taken to prevent them.

It is this circumstance that has induced me to propose for the
operation of sarcocele, a modification which consists, after having
dissected around the cord after the first incision, 1st, in searching
immediately for the vas deferens, which is easily found by its extreme
hardness; 2d, in giving it to an assistant to hold; 3d, in passing
a bistoury between it and the blood vessels; 4th, in cutting the
blood vessels first and leaving the vas deferens untouched; 5th, in
afterwards tying the artery, which is easily discovered by the jet
of blood; 6th, and then, when this is done in cutting also the vas
deferens. It is evident, that by this section at two different times,
we have the advantage of applying the ligature without fear of the
retraction of the artery, since the vas deferens to which it adheres,
and which is not cut, until it is tied, is sufficient to retain it.
I have not performed the operation; but it is evident that there is
nothing to prevent the execution of this plan, since the parts are
sound where we cut. I have moreover always taught the student to manage
in this way with ease. It is especially when it is necessary to cut the
cord very near the ring, because it is diseased in its course, that
this method of operating appears to me to have great advantages.

I think that the retraction of arteries that have been drawn, and
their contraction afterwards, perform an important part, in producing
the absence of hemorrhage in most wounds by laceration, a singular
phenomenon, that particularly distinguishes these wounds from those
by cutting, even when a considerable vessel happens to be in their
course. Many authors have given examples of this; we find some
particularly in the works of Sabatier.


III. _Vital Properties._


_Properties of Animal Life. Sensibility._

Have the arteries animal sensibility? Upon this point, facts teach
us what follows. 1st. The ligature of an artery sometimes produces
a painful sensation, more frequently it does not. It is especially
in the spermatic that the pain is frequently felt, but this can be
referred to the nerves. 2d. I can without exaggeration say, that I have
made experiments upon more than a hundred dogs, in whom I have forced
various substances through the carotid to the brain, and have irritated
this artery with the scalpel, acids, alkalies, &c. but that the animals
have never given any marks of pain. Many authors have obtained similar
results. 3d. I would observe also, that it is an additional proof of
the kind of insensibility of the nerves of organic life, which as we
have seen are distributed to the arteries. 4th. This is what I have
observed concerning the irritation of the common membrane of the red
blood; the injection of a mild fluid at the temperature of the animal
produces no effect; but an irritating fluid, as ink, a solution of
acid, wine, &c. creates severe pain equal to that arising from the
irritation of the most sensible parts, if we may judge by the cries and
agitation of the animal, the moment the fluid enters the carotid.


_Contractility._

Animal contractility does not exist in the arteries. In fact this
contractility could only depend upon a relation between these vessels
and the brain, by the means of the nerves; now, 1st, any irritation
produced upon this last viscus, occasioning convulsions in the organs
under the influence of the will, has no effect upon the arteries. 2d.
Opium, which in a certain dose, paralyzes, if we may so say, the same
organs, leaves the arterial motion wholly unaffected. 3d. If we lay
the spinal marrow bare, and irritate or compress it, the action of
the arteries is neither increased or diminished, whilst the voluntary
muscles become the seat of convulsions or paralysis. 4th. No effect is
produced upon the arteries by different irritations, whether of the
nerves of the cerebral system, which accompany the vessels without
giving them any apparent filaments, or of the nerves of the system
of ganglions, which are distributed irregularly and in very great
number upon their external surface. 5th. To remove all doubt upon this
subject, I selected galvanism, the most powerful kind of excitement.
Without effect did I arm on the one hand the cerebral nerves, on the
other, the arteries that are joined to them; the contact of the two
armed points does not produce in the arteries the motion it excites
in the muscles in which the nerves are spread. The effect is the same
in experiments upon the nerves of the ganglions. I armed on one hand
the upper part of the mesenteric plexus, on the other, the arteries
of the same name, first stripped of their serous and cellular coat;
the contact was entirely without effect. The arterial system does not
possess that faculty of motion which the action of the brain is capable
of producing. All that has been written by different authors, by Cullen
in particular, upon the nervous power, upon the action of the brain on
the arterial system, is vague, illusory and contradicted by experiment.


_Properties of Organic Life. Sensible Organic Contractility._

The sensible organic contractility is evidently wanting in the system
of which we are treating. In whatever way we irritate an artery in a
living animal, it remains uniformly immoveable. 1st. If we stimulate
the external surface with a scalpel or any other instrument, it is
easy to make this remark. 2d. The same observation is made when we
excite the internal surface, an experiment that I have often made,
because we know that the heart is more irritable internally than
externally. 3d. An artery cut longitudinally in a living animal
does not turn over at its edges like the intestines in similar
circumstances. 4th. An arterial tube, drawn out of the body, never
gives like the intestines, the heart, &c. any mark of contractility.
5th. If we raise the arterial plates, layer by layer, in a living
animal or one recently killed, we see nothing of that trembling, that
palpitation that the fibres of the organic muscles exhibit under like
circumstances; on the contrary, we observe in them a kind of inertia
very analogous to that of tendinous, aponeurotic fibres, &c. 6th. It is
said, that by placing the finger in an artery, a contraction is felt.
I have often made this experiment; the contraction is infinitely less
sensible than has been said; besides it is produced evidently by the
contractility of texture. 7th. Lamure says, that a portion of blood
being intercepted between two ligatures in an artery, the parietes
of it continue to contract, though deprived of the influence of the
heart; this is not correct. It is so important that I have examined it
myself; I have repeated this experiment at least ten times upon the
carotid; the following has always been the result; the tube comprised
between the two ligatures and filled with blood, is agitated by a real
motion, but it is only that of the common locomotion that it partakes
with the whole artery, and which arises from the impetus of the blood
against the ligature nearest the heart. To be convinced of this, it
is only necessary to lay bare a considerable portion of this artery;
we see evidently that the whole tube, whether the portion nearest
the heart, or that comprised between the ligatures, or that which is
beyond, is agitated by a common motion. 8th. Instead of the blood
I have intercepted different irritating fluids in a portion of an
artery; there is the same inertia, the same want of contraction in the
parietes; but the same motion derived from the general locomotion. 9th.
Many authors have produced a contraction on the part of the arteries by
stimulating them with concentrated acids. This is true, and I have also
produced this effect; but it is not the result of contractility, but it
is the horny hardening. Observe also that the arterial texture never
returns to its primitive state after a contraction like this; that the
alkalies, that are as irritating as the acids when the vital forces are
excited, have no effect here; it is the same phenomenon during life, as
that which we have spoken of as taking place after death.

There can be no doubt, I think, after this, that the arteries do not
exercise during life any kind of contraction by themselves and under
the vital influence. All that has been said upon this point, is the
evident effect of the contractility of texture. Thus when we open
an artery between two ligatures, it empties itself of the blood it
contains, or of the fluid that is accidentally pushed there; the same
phenomenon takes place when we place only one ligature that intercepts
the influence of the heart, &c. It is so true, that all these phenomena
and other similar ones depend upon the properties of texture, that
they take place in the dead body as long as an artery is not putrid.
Fill any portion of the arterial system, afterwards open one of its
tubes, it empties itself immediately by contracting. The contraction
produced by the defect of extension, is that which characterizes
the contractility of texture. Irritability or sensible organic
contractility, supposes on the contrary uniformly the application of a
stimulus.


_Insensible Organic Contractility._

Insensible organic contractility or tone very evidently exists in the
arteries. In the great trunks and wherever the pulsation is sensible,
its functions are limited exclusively to nutrition and exhalation,
if this last takes place in the interior of arteries, which I do not
believe. But when the influence of the heart upon the blood contained
in these vessels ceases, which happens at the commencement of the
capillary system, then the tone begins to have an influence not only
upon the nutrition of the vascular parieties, but also upon the
circulation that is going on there; it is even wholly by the tonic
powers, as we shall see, that the circulation of the small vessels is
carried on; the heart has no influence there. I shall treat of this
property under the general capillary system; here it performs but a
very weak part.

As to organic sensibility, it evidently exists in the arteries, since
it cannot be separated from the preceding contractility; like it, it
is obscure in the great trunks, which have only what is necessary for
their nutrition.

From the small development of the organic forces of the arterial
texture, it is evident that this texture would rarely be the seat of
affections, over which these properties particularly preside. This also
is proved by observation.

1st. Acute diseases are rarely observed in the arteries. Among all the
bodies that I have examined, I have found but very few in which there
were traces of inflammation in the arterial texture. I would observe
upon this subject, that it is necessary to distinguish accurately
the redness which is, as we have said, the effect of maceration, and
which even appears spontaneously in the dead body some time after
death, especially in the cerebral arteries; it is necessary, I say,
to distinguish it from that which arises from inflammation. In one
the arterial fibres are really red, in the other they appear so only
by the injection of their vessels. Is the common membrane inflamed in
inflammatory fever? I am entirely ignorant. These simple fevers are
so rare, especially in hospitals that we have hardly an opportunity
of examining patients that have died of them. But by supposing that
this inflammation existed, the infrequency of these fevers considered
in their simple state, would prove even how little the arteries are
disposed to inflame. 2d. The arteries are not often the seat of chronic
affections. Except on the one hand aneurism, in which the arterial
texture is hardly altered, but merely broken, and in which consequently
its organic sensibility performs but a very small part; on the other,
the osseous incrustations, most of the alterations that are so frequent
in the other textures, are not observed in this.

This texture must be ranked with the cartilaginous, the
fibro-cartilaginous, the fibrous, the muscular even, &c. as it respects
the infrequency of organic alterations. These textures exhibit a
phenomenon opposed to that of the serous, mucous, glandular, dermoid
systems, &c. which are especially characterized by the frequency of
these alterations. Compare the organic properties, the sensibility
and insensible contractility in the two classes of textures; you will
see them very feeble in the first, in which in a natural state, they
preside only over nutrition; you will observe, on the contrary, that
they are very evident in the second, because there they preside over
nutrition, exhalation, absorption, secretion, &c.

The difficulty with which the arterial texture inflames and
participates in the different alterations of the neighbouring organs,
preserves the integrity of the circulation in many cases. What would
become of this function, if the arteries received as easily as the
other textures, the influence of surrounding diseases? Placed at every
moment by the side of inflamed, suppurating, swelled parts, &c. if they
become changed by their neighbourhood, especially in the great trunks,
a general derangement would soon be felt in the motion of the blood.
Dissect the arteries in the organic affections of the stomach, the
liver, the spleen, &c.; they are untouched, and only a little increased
in size; whilst a general swelling seems to confound in a new mass all
the neighbouring textures.

The clots in aneurism adhere sometimes so intimately to the common
membrane, that we are obliged to remove them with an instrument. But
this adhesion is entirely inorganic; it is a kind of agglutination,
that would imply the small degree of life of this common membrane, as
the facility with which colours are fixed in the epidermis implies it
in this last organ.


_Remarks upon the causes of the motion of the red blood._

The red blood is moved in the heart by a mechanism which there is no
difficulty in understanding. But an important question remains to
be decided concerning its motion in the arteries; are these vessels
active or passive in this motion? When the physician examines the
different states of the pulse, is it the state of the heart or that of
the arterial system that he ascertains? From the absence of sensible
organic contractility, as we have observed in this texture, it is
evident that its part would be especially passive; that the motion of
which it is the seat is communicated to it; that the heart is the great
agent of the pulsation of the arteries; that it is that which gives the
impulse, which these vessels only obey, and that consequently in almost
all cases the state of the pulse is the index of the state in which
the vital forces of the heart are found, and not of the state of the
arterial system, whose life is not more raised in the greatest and most
frequent pulsatory motions, than in the feeblest and most infrequent.
Thus in convulsions, the principle of which is a wound, an irritation
of the brain, &c. the nerves, though conductors, are, if we may so say,
passive.

I will now examine in detail this important question, that so many
physicians have considered differently.


_Influence of the heart in the motion of red blood._

1st. The first reason that induces me to believe that the heart is
almost every thing, and that the arteries are particularly passive on
the score of vitality in the motion of the red blood, is the comparison
of the vital forces of these two organs, the astonishing activity
of the organic contractility of the heart, and the absence of this
property in the arteries. In fact, to move of itself, it is necessary
that an organ should have the principle of motion, that is to say,
one of the two kinds of vital contractility in a sensible degree, the
organic or the animal; for we do not know of other vital forces in the
animal organs, and we cannot say that nature has created one especially
destined for the arteries. Grimaud admitted that there was an active
dilatation of the vessels, which opened of themselves, according to
him, to receive the blood, and were not opened by its impulse. We shall
see that this kind of motion is real, to a certain extent, both in the
heart and in the organic muscles. But here it is wholly different;
the heart dilates of itself when it is empty, as we see by drawing it
out of a living animal, and by emptying it afterwards of the fluid it
contains, because it has in itself the cause of its dilatation. But in
no case have I seen the arteries thus undergo an alternate motion when
they are empty. They are uniformly found contracted upon themselves.

2d. If the arteries produce the pulse by their vital contraction, there
ought to be an irregularity in the pulsations below an aneurismal
tumour, since the arterial texture being altered, it loses in part its
contractility, or at least this property is changed. Now we observe
precisely the contrary. On the other hand, every organic disease of the
heart inevitably affects the pulse. Is there an increase of the fleshy
fibres, as in the aneurisms in which the left ventricle is so thick?
it becomes strong; it is irregular, if obstructions exist at the
mitral or aortic valves. If in old age, ossification exists only in the
arteries, the circulation is unaffected; if at the origin of the aorta
or in the heart, it is irregular. An artery might become a bony canal,
and the blood would circulate there as usual, with the difference
only of pulsation. What I have said of the chronic affections of the
heart may be said of the acute ones. Syncope arrests its motion, it
arrests also the pulse. Certain passions, as anger, fear, &c. seem to
be a stimulant to it; they hasten also the arterial motion. All kinds
of inflammation of the pericardium affect the pulse. This membrane
often adheres to the heart in consequence of inflammation, and at
the same time the pleura of both sides adheres to it also; so that
we might say then that the lungs and the heart made but one. I have
seen four examples of this morbid state, in which the motions of the
heart were much contracted; in all the pulse was small, irregular, and
intermittent. The more I open bodies, the more I am convinced that
when the irregularity of the pulse is uniform for a considerable time,
there are almost always organic affections of the heart; from which
there is reason to believe that the irregularities of the pulse that
are acute, if I may use the term, arise from an alteration, not in the
texture, but in the vital forces of this organ, and that the arteries
are almost entirely disconnected with it. We know how frequent these
irregularities are in acute diseases. Since then every alteration of
the heart essentially affects the pulse, and those of the arteries on
the contrary, leave it unaffected, we should certainly conclude from
this, that the one is essentially active in this great phenomenon, and
that the others, on the contrary, are almost passive.

3d. There is no doubt that at the instant a ligature prevents an
artery from receiving the influence of the heart, it ceases to
beat. All the phenomena of aneurisms, treated by compression or by
ligature, establish this fact. If the contrary has sometimes been
observed, it arises only from anastomoses, and then it is equally the
heart that makes the artery beat above and below the ligature. It is
absolutely false, as I have said, that an artery never beats between
two ligatures. Often in aneurism the artery being compressed below the
tumour, this beats much stronger than before.

4th. Cut off the arm of a dead body, and make it pliable by leaving it
for some time in a tepid bath. Fix afterwards to the brachial artery a
small tube; place the other extremity of this tube in the open carotid
of a large living dog; immediately the heart of the animal will drive
blood into the arm. The artery will have a kind of pulsation, less,
without doubt, than in a natural state, but sufficient to be perceived
even through the integuments. I have often repeated this singular and
curious experiment, of which I shall have occasion to speak again. It
was suggested to me by another, of which I have given an account in
my Treatise on the Membranes, and which consists in making the red
blood circulate in the veins, without the motion of locomotion, it is
true, but with a rustling sensible to the finger, and with a velocity
almost equal to that of the arteries. This last experiment alone would
prove that the heart is almost the only agent of impulse of the blood
circulating in the arteries; in fact, every throw of blood coming from
the veins is uniform, because the capillary system pours without a jet
this fluid into these vessels. On the other hand, every arterial throw
is by jets, which are produced by the contraction of the heart. Now if
you open a vein in which you have made red blood circulate by a curved
tube, the throw of blood wall be in jets, which will correspond to the
contractions of the heart. With the difference merely of locomotion,
a vein presents during the circulation of the red blood, the same
phenomena as an artery. Make, on the other hand, the reverse of this
experiment, that is to say, fit a curved tube to a vein and an artery,
so that the blood of the first may flow into the other; the artery will
lose immediately its pulsatory motion, unless it be kept up in the
collateral branches; this does not happen if we select great trunks,
for example, the crural and corresponding vein. It is evident, that
all these experiments, which I have frequently repeated, would give a
result entirely opposite, if the arteries took an active part in the
circulation by their vital properties.

5th. The force of the heart makes the blood circulate through inert
tubes, fixed to the arteries, to a considerable extent. If we cut an
inch of the carotid artery, and substitute a tube fixed to the two open
ends of this artery, the blood will go through this tube and the artery
pulsate as usual above. I cannot imagine in what way those have been
deceived who have obtained different results.

6th. Take two dogs; fix the end of a tube to the carotid of one, on the
side of the heart, and the other end of the same tube to the crural or
carotid of the other, on the side opposite to this organ; the heart
of the first will uniformly make the arteries of the second pulsate,
by sending blood to them. All my experiments upon death, experiments
already published, have shown me this phenomenon. Besides, in aneurism
the pulsation takes place below the tumour; yet at that part, the two
ends of the broken artery are separated; the cellular membrane alone
serves to unite them, by forming the cyst. The blood passes then
through an intermediate body that is not arterial.

7th. Fix to an artery one end of a tube, which has at the other a sac
made of skin, or gummed taffety, the blood will fill it immediately;
then at each contraction of the heart, it will have a sort of
pulsation. It is thus that the aneurismal tumour pulsates, which is
cellular. Whatever may be the organ that contributes to form the cyst,
it would pulsate, provided it received, with the blood, the impulse of
the heart.

8th. I would ask, if the active dilatation of the arteries could be
sufficient to raise the brain, impart a motion to the leg that is
crossed upon that of the opposite side, to overcome the weight of the
tumours that are situated in their course, and raise them at each
pulsation. It evidently requires a more powerful organ to produce these
phenomena, and this organ is the heart.

9th. How is it, that the pulsation of all the arteries is simultaneous,
if a single centre does not preside over this pulsation? The whole
arterial system, struck suddenly with the same blow, is raised and
pulsates at the same time. Is it not evident, that if the arteries
contracted by themselves, the least derangement in one part, the least
pressure, &c. would produce a discordance in the motions?

10th. No animal has arterial pulsations, if it has not a heart, or a
fleshy vessel, knotty, and divided by contractions, as in many insects;
have the pulsations of this vessel, which is a substitute for the
heart, been well observed? It is thus that the system of the vena porta
never has pulsations, though its hepatic part is arranged like the
arteries.

11th. The two ends of a cut artery pour out blood, but this is the
effect of the anastomoses, and not of the re-action of the end opposite
to the heart, as I thought myself for some time. It is for the same
reason that an artery can pulsate sometimes below a ligature.

12th. I have no doubt but that without the heart, the red blood would
have in its great canal, a kind of motion, a motion that would resemble
that of the vena porta; it would be entirely without pulsation.

13th. Cases have been quoted, in which the motion of the arteries
was said to take place as usual, though they contained no blood. I
confess that I do not know how we can be assured of this fact. But if
it was real, it must be placed at the side of that of the soldier, who
could stop the motion of his heart at will. What can we conclude from
an insulated phenomenon, which is in contradiction to all those that
nature daily presents? It may not be useless, I think, to remark, that
since healthy physiology has advanced, has been studied with method, a
love of truth, and a desire only to collect facts, we have no longer
been presented with those extraordinary cases in which nature seems to
depart from the laws she has imposed upon herself.

From all that has been said, it follows, I think, very evidently, that
in the pulsation of the arteries, the heart is almost the only power
that puts the fluid in motion; that the vessels are then passive,
that they obey the motion that is communicated to them, but that
they have none of themselves dependant at least on their vitality.
Thus nature has chosen for the arterial texture one of those of
the economy, in which life is the least evident; as the heart is
remarkable for its vital properties, the arteries are remarkable for
the absence of them. They must be ranked with the cartilaginous,
fibrous, fibro-cartilaginous textures, &c. It is that they may not
disturb the unity of impulse by their motions, that nature has thus
formed the arteries. Suppose that they had the same vital forces as the
intestines; what would become of life? Any convulsive contraction a
little too strong in the aorta or in the great trunks, by contracting
their caliber too much, would arrest the circulation, and produce the
most serious effects by agitating it in an opposite direction to the
heart. In the intestinal canal, this phenomenon only produces vomiting.
It would produce death suddenly in the arterial system. The more
attentively we examine, the more we shall be convinced of the necessity
of having but one agent of impulse for the arterial system, and of
having this system inert, so that it cannot be able to arrest the
course of the blood.

I do not say that the arteries can never contract from the vital
influence; the skin which is not irritable, wrinkles by cold. But the
cases are very rare, in which the arteries contract. When they exist
they cause an inequality of the pulse on the two sides; an inequality
rarely noticed in diseases.


_Of the limits of the action of the Heart._

The heart is then the essential cause of the pulse; it is this which
puts every thing in action in the arterial motion. Many authors have
overrated its influence; they have thought that its impulse was
sufficient to produce, not only the arterial motion, but also that of
the general capillary system, and even that of the veins; so that the
contraction of the left ventricle alone is the cause, according to
them, of the long course the blood runs from it to the right ventricle.
But it is incontestably proved, as we shall see, that when this fluid
has arrived in the general capillary system, it is absolutely beyond
the influence of the heart, and that it moves only by that of the tonic
forces of the small vessels, and therefore for a stronger reason, the
left ventricle has no influence in the venous system. It is in this
respect that the authors, of whom I have spoken, have erred, and not
under that of the impulse that they have admitted in the arterial
system on the part of the heart.

We can, I think, establish nearly the limits of the influence of the
heart upon the blood, by fixing them where this fluid is transformed
from red to black in the general capillary system. As it advances in
the small vessels, the impulse received is undoubtedly weakened, and
the small vessels supply it by their insensible organic contractility;
but I believe that the motion received from the heart, is not entirely
lost until at the place of the change into black blood; so that we
can establish for a general principle, 1st, that in the great trunks,
in the branches and even in the smaller branches, the heart is almost
every thing for the motion of the blood; 2d, that in the ramifications,
it is in part this organ and in part the vital action of the arteries,
which contributes to this motion; 3d, that finally it is this vascular
vital action alone in the general capillary system.

The pulse exists in its fulness, only in the trunks, the branches, and
the smaller branches. It is evidently weakened in the ramifications;
it becomes nothing in the capillary system. The arterial texture
of the great trunks is provided, as we have seen, with insensible
contractility. But the impulse received by the heart is on the one
part so strong, and the column of blood so great, that the influence
of this kind of contractility is really nothing. Irritability alone
could have influence; but this does not exist in the arteries. On the
contrary, in the small vessels, the shock on the one hand impressed by
the heart is insensibly weakened; on the other, the streams of blood
being so fine, they have no occasion for any thing to produce their
motion, except a kind of oscillation, an insensible vibration of the
vascular parietes. It is this that essentially distinguishes the two
kinds of organic contractility. The one is exerted only upon the fluids
in mass, as upon the blood, the aliments, the urine, &c. The other
causes the motion of the fluids when divided into small streams; it
presides over the capillary circulation, exhalation and secretion. The
influence of the first is very considerable wherever there is a great
cavity, as the stomach, the bladder, the intestines; that of the other
takes place only in the small vessels. As long as the blood is in a
considerable mass, the heart must inevitably be the agent of impulse,
the arteries cannot be, from their want of irritability. When it is in
very small streams, then it moves by the insensible contractility of
the vessels. This then is the part which this property performs in the
system with red blood; 1st, it exists in the trunks, the branches and
the smaller branches; but its effect is nothing where that of the heart
is evident. 2d. That of the heart being weakened in the ramifications,
its own contractility begins to have an influence. 3d. Finally, the
heart ceasing to agitate the blood in the general capillary system, the
insensible organic contractility or tone, is the sole cause of motion.


_Phenomena of the impulse of the Heart._

What part then have the arteries in the pulse? The following is what
takes place in this great phenomenon; the arteries are always full
of blood, the impulse that the blood in them receives from the left
ventricle, is felt at the instant in the whole system, and even to
its extremities. Imagine to yourself a syringe, the tube of which
gives rise to an infinity of branches, which afterwards give origin
successively to a number of smaller ones; if, when you push the piston
of the syringe, its body and all the branches and smaller branches
arising from it, are already full of fluid, it is evident that at the
very instant in which the piston shall push the fluid in the body, it
will go out on all sides through the open branches. Now suppose, that
instead of a piston, you could make the parietes of the body of the
syringe suddenly contract, the fluid at the instant of the contraction
would spout out on all sides from these open branches. Another
comparison will render this more evident; strike at one end of a long
timber, the motion will be suddenly felt at the opposite one.

We can from this form an idea of what takes place at the instant of
the contraction of the left ventricle. Authors have spoken of a wave
or undulation of blood, being propagated through the whole arterial
system, and formed by the two ounces of blood that are poured into
the arteries at each contraction. The arterial motion should be thus
considered, if the arteries were empty at the instant of contraction;
but in their state of fulness, the impulse is generally and suddenly
felt, and with almost as much force at the extremities as at the origin
of the arteries; it is only in the ramifications that the motion
becomes a little weakened. Fill with water the arteries of a dead
body, and fix a syringe full at the aorta; at the instant you push the
piston, the water will spout out of the tibial or any other artery, if
you loosen an opening that had been previously made in them.

The idea that is commonly entertained of the progressive motion of the
blood, is wholly incorrect. This fluid has been considered as flowing
in the arteries almost like water in brooks. It is not so. At each
contraction of the ventricle, it experiences suddenly a general motion
that is felt at its extremities. Do you wish for another comparison?
Suppose a syringe, to the tube of which is fitted a series of elastic
pipes arising from each other; push the piston, you will see all these
pipes swell simultaneously, become straight, and the fluid flow at the
same time to the extremities, if they are open.

It is not the contraction of the arteries that drives the blood to
their extremities. This is so true, that if you open one of these
vessels at a distance from the heart, each jet that the blood will make
in going out, will correspond to each contraction of the ventricle. Now
if the arteries drove the blood to all the extremities, by contracting,
their contraction and relaxation would alternate with those of the
heart; but if it was so, each jet of the arterial throw should
correspond to each relaxation of the ventricle; the contrary of this is
the case as I have just said.

From this we see how very inaccurate is the common opinion, which I
believed myself for many years, viz. that the auricles contract at the
same time with the arteries, and the veins at the same time with the
ventricles. The circulation of red blood is thus explained; 1st, the
pulmonary veins drive the blood into the left auricle. 2d. This by
contracting forces it into the ventricle, which dilates to receive it.
3d. This last contracts afterwards, sends it to the aorta which dilates
at the instant of contraction; 4th, then this contracts to drive it to
all the parts. This last does not take place; you can never observe it
like the others, in a living animal. Examine as closely as possible, a
great artery laid bare; it rises, but it does not dilate hardly at all
in an ordinary state, nor does it contract. Contraction of the left
ventricle; general motion of all the arterial blood; the entrance of
this blood into the capillary system, are three things that take place
at the same instant. It is like the blow on the timber, that is felt at
one end, at the same time that it is received at the opposite.

We can form a very accurate idea of the circulation by examining the
mesenteric arteries through the peritoneum, after having opened the
abdomen of an animal; at each pulsation you see them all simultaneously
rise and pulsate at their extremity as well as at their origin.

It is impossible to form an idea of the arterial motion, by considering
the wave or undulation of blood as extending itself at each contraction
in the arteries, and arriving afterwards successively at the
extremities. Read all the authors upon the circulation; you will see
that there is no subject that is treated oftener or more at length,
than that of the course of the arterial blood, and yet there is no one
in which you are left in more doubt and obscurity. Why? because all go
upon a false principle, and all the consequences are inaccurate, where
the principle itself is not correct.

It is not the wave of blood going from the ventricle, that is driven at
each contraction into the capillary system; it is the portion of this
fluid which is found nearest this system, as in the syringe, it is the
portion that is in the tube that the piston forces out and not that
with which it is in contact; whence it follows, that it is only at the
end of some time that the blood arrives from the heart, at the general
capillary system, that it remains during a number of contractions in
the arteries, and that it is only successively expelled; which favours
the mixture of the different principles that compose it.

From this manner of considering the arterial motion, which is the only
real and admissible one, it is evidently impossible that the curves can
injure this motion, besides this is proved by many facts.

I consider also as destitute of every kind of foundation all that has
been said in the books of physiology, upon the causes of the delay
occasioned in the course of the blood, 1st, by its passage from a
narrower to a broader place, and by the conical form of the general
arterial system; 2d, by friction; 3d, by the angles; 4th, by the
anastomoses which give an opposite shock, &c. &c. All this would be
true if the arteries were empty at the time of contraction, because the
blood would then have in them, truly a progressive motion. But in the
general and instantaneous impulse that the whole mass spread in the
arterial system experiences, all these causes are evidently nothing. I
return now to the trifling but very accurate comparison of the syringe.
Suppose that a tube twisted in a thousand ways, with numerous angles,
inequalities, internal projections, &c. was fixed to it; if the tube
and the body of the syringe are full at the instant we push the piston,
the water will escape suddenly from the extremity of this tube with
as much force as if it was straight and short. It is so true that all
the causes of delay, which would have some effect, if the arteries
were empty at the instant the blood is driven into them, have none in
their ordinary state, that many judicious observers, who even admitted
the delay, have seen in their experiments that the motion was every
where the same, in the smaller branches as in the trunks. Why did not
this undeceive them? We know that the pulse is the same in all parts
of the arterial system; how could it be if there was this delay? What
has greatly retarded the progress of the physiology of the circulation,
is the idea that is attached to the velocity of the course of the red
blood. This velocity cannot be rightly estimated, because the motion
is not successive, because, to speak correctly, the blood does not
flow; it is suddenly driven by a general impulse, in which we cannot
calculate any thing.

Philosophers have calculated the motion of fluids, where their
particles are successively displaced, as in the course of a river; but
they have paid less attention to that brisk motion of the whole or of
the mass, if I may so say, that takes place in canals in which they are
enclosed on all sides, and are acted upon at one extremity.


_Remarks upon the Pulse._

Two things are already evidently proved, viz. 1st, that the heart
is the peculiar agent of the arterial motion, and that the arteries
are almost passive in this motion; 2d, that it consists in a general
impulse suddenly experienced by the whole mass of red blood, felt
at the same time at the extremities and in the trunks, and not in a
successive progression of a wave or undulation that goes from the left
ventricle. It remains for me to examine how the heart produces the
pulse by this brisk and instantaneous motion. There is still much to be
elucidated upon this point; but we cannot deny that the locomotion of
the arterial system does much in this phenomenon. At the instant the
mass of blood is driven thus from the heart towards the extremities,
by a motion of the whole, if we may so say, it tends inevitably to
straighten the arteries, especially when they are tortuous. This
straightening necessarily produces a locomotion, which causes the
pulsation of the artery.

As to the dilatation, it is hardly any thing in an ordinary state;
however if you press a little upon an artery, the blood makes an effort
to dilate it and this effort increases the sensation of the pulse;
Jadelot thought that it alone constituted it. On the other hand, if
much blood enters the arterial system at the instant of the contraction
of the heart; if a resistance exists in the general capillary system,
the arteries can be also dilated, but it is not their return upon
themselves or contraction that drives the blood into the capillaries;
this return is subsequent. In fact, at the instant of contraction,
the blood enters on the one part into the arteries in going from the
ventricle, and goes on the other to enter the capillary system; these
two phenomena take place at the same time, since they arise from the
same impulse. Then when there is a contraction in the artery, a motion
which is only the contractility of texture put into action, this
contraction does not drive the blood; but it takes place, because the
blood has been driven into the capillary system at the instant of the
contraction; it is because the artery ceases to be distended, that
it returns upon itself or contracts, and not because it is actually
distended. Hence how the arterial contraction can alternate with
that of the left ventricle; but it is not in the sense that authors
have understood it. There are then two periods in the motion of the
red blood; 1st, contraction of the ventricle; slight dilatation of
the arterial system by the blood that enters it; general locomotion;
passage into the capillary system of a portion of this red blood; all
these phenomena happen at the same time; it is the period when the
pulse is felt; it is that of the diastole. 2d. In the next period,
the ventricle is relaxed to fill itself anew; less full of blood, the
arteries contract a little upon themselves; all take the place they had
lost during the locomotion; this is the period of the systole, a period
purely passive, while some have thought it a very active one for the
arteries.

As but little blood is driven at each pulsation out of the ventricle,
which does not wholly empty itself; and as, on the other hand, at the
same time it enters the arteries it goes out from the side opposite
to the heart, the arterial dilatation and, consequently, contraction,
are almost nothing; thus, they cannot be perceived. Besides, if the
contraction really took place, it would hardly be apparent; for when it
is the contractility of texture that is in action, it produces a slow
insensible motion, a real tightening; whereas contraction, the effect
of irritability is abrupt, instantaneous, and produces a motion that
the eye always distinguishes.

I cannot insist too much upon this fact, which is certain, viz. that
if there is a slight contraction in the arteries at the instant the
pulse ceases to beat, it is not that they have contracted to drive the
blood, but merely that they contract upon themselves, because the blood
that has gone into the capillaries prevents their being sufficiently
dilated; it is contractility for the want of extension. Hence why the
throws of arterial blood going from an open artery, correspond with the
dilatation of these vessels, and the weakening of the throw with their
contraction, which would be entirely the reverse, according to the
common opinion.

The dilatation and contraction of the arteries being almost nothing in
the ordinary state, it appears that the peculiar cause of the pulse
is, as Weitbreck has observed, in the locomotion of the arteries, a
locomotion that is general and instantaneous in the whole system, and
not consecutive, as this author has understood it. I shall not relate
here the proofs of this locomotion; they can be found every where. I
would observe only, that it is so manifest in living animals, that when
we have often examined the circulation by their means, it is impossible
to doubt its reality.

Different causes can make the pulse vary; these causes are, 1st,
relative to the heart, almost the only agent of impulse; thus its
sensible organic contractility, increased, diminished, altered
sympathetically or in any other way, can make it with the same stimulus
contract quicker, slower, or more irregularly than common; thus the
diseases of its organization inevitably alter its motion. 2d. The blood
charged with different natural or morbific substances is a stimulant
more or less capable of putting in play the motion of the heart. 3d.
The general capillary system, according as it receives a greater or
less quantity of blood, or refuses admission to that which the arteries
send there, &c. produces necessarily numerous varieties in the pulse.
There are but few causes relative to the arteries themselves.

If now we consider the great number of causes that can be referred
to these three principal heads, we shall cease to wonder at the
prodigious variety that the pulse exhibits in health, and especially
in diseases. Besides, I shall not examine here in its whole extent
the question concerning the pulse; it is sufficient to have announced
the principles; I shall hereafter develop the consequences, which
are, as we know, of the greatest importance to the physician. We see
by the different views that I have presented, that almost all authors
have described in an inaccurate manner the motion of the blood, and
what loose ideas they have had of it. Experiments have only served to
confuse them; it is a work that requires to be entirely done again,
either with the materials that many respectable authors have already
amassed, especially Haller, Spallanzani, Weitbreck, Lamure, Jadelot,
&c. or with new facts. I have only presented the first bases of this
work.

We have seen how favourable the firm and elastic structure of the
arterial texture is to the locomotion of the arteries, and the
influence the curves of these vessels have upon it. I will add that
the loose union that they form with the neighbouring parts, and their
uniform position in the cellular texture, singularly favour this
locomotion.

If the red blood flowed in the veins, we should feel under the finger
a kind of rustling, instead of the motion of the pulse; this is what
happens in varicose aneurism. There would be no locomotion if the
arterial parietes were made of the dermoid, mucous, serous textures,
&c. there would be different phenomena with the common impulse.

There are then two things in the pulse; 1st, impulse of the blood,
sudden and general motion of its mass by the contraction of the heart;
2d, locomotion of the arteries, an effect produced by this fluid
upon the arterial parietes which transmit it. The first is the most
essential; as to the second, it would vary, if the arterial texture
that produced it ceased to be the same; it depends upon this texture,
and is not essential to the circulation.

When an artery is cut at the end of its trunk, the locomotion is much
less sensible in this trunk, because less resistance is offered there
to the course of the blood.

If an artery is opened laterally, it forms two currents of blood in an
opposite direction, which are driven towards the opening, and which
unite in one throw. One of these currents is direct, the other arises
from anastomoses. It is the same as when an artery is cut, and the
blood flows at both ends.

If an artery is wholly divided, more blood flows from it in a given
time, than passed through it before in the same time to go to the
capillary system, which resisted more. We cannot then judge of the
velocity of the blood by the throw from the open arteries.


_Sympathies._

We have seen that the arteries are rarely the seat of diseases
either acute or chronic, on account of the obscurity of their vital
properties. They can exert then but a very slight influence upon the
other organs; thus, except some sympathetic pains that are experienced
in aneurism, this influence of the arterial texture upon the other
systems is merely nothing. In two or three cases I have seen convulsive
motions produced by the injection of a very irritating fluid in the
arteries. It is easy to distinguish these sympathetic motions, from
those that pain produces in an animal who is struggling to disengage
himself; they are violent tremors or stiffness, like tetanus. It may
be imagined that these experiments should not be made in the carotids,
because the brain, irritated by the injected fluids, would produce
convulsions arising from the stimulant that would be then directly
applied to it, and not from a sympathetic relation. Besides, death
would be the immediate consequence of the experiment, if it was made
upon the carotid.

On the other hand, as the arteries have not sensible organic
contractility, hardly any animal sensibility, and but little tone,
the other organs can with difficulty develop in them sympathies by
their influence; for, in order that a vital property should be brought
sympathetically into action in a part, it is necessary that it should
exist there, and even be conspicuous. Thus the innumerable variations
of the pulse, which are the product of sympathies, have all essentially
their seat in the heart; the arteries are not connected with them.
Now the sympathies make the heart contract or arrest its motion, as
stimulants or sedatives directly applied to it, that is to say, by
acting on its sensible organic contractility. When an aneurism is
broken in a fit of anger, or in the act of coition, a case of which
I have seen with Desault, it is the motion of the blood, which is
suddenly increased, that is the cause of it; it is not the arterial
texture that has been affected by the passion. Besides, upon what
can the sympathies act in the arteries? It could not be either upon
the elasticity or the contractility of texture, the only properties,
however, capable of contracting these vessels. Observe, also, that the
sympathies put in action only the vital properties, because they are
themselves a phenomenon purely vital. The physical properties and the
properties of texture cannot be exercised under their influence; this
is an important observation.

Besides, as the arteries are every where spread in the organs, and as
they form, if we may so say, a part with them, it would be difficult
to distinguish what belongs to them, especially as it respects
sensibility, from what is peculiar to these organs.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.


I. _State of this system in the Fœtus._

The fœtus differs essentially from the infant that has breathed, in
this, that its two great vascular systems in reality form but one,
since the foramen ovale on the one hand, and the ductus arteriosus
on the other, form a direct communication between the two. This
communication is much more evident at the period nearest conception;
these openings contract towards the period of birth. 1st. The foramen
ovale is formed, in the first months, by two productions in the form
of a crescent, whose concave surfaces are opposite, and leave between
them an oval space, which is constantly contracting, because these two
productions constantly approximate and have a tendency to cross each
other, which in fact takes place after birth. 2d. The ductus arteriosus
contracts as the pulmonary artery dilates.

While these two openings are free, which is constantly the case in
the fœtus, the two systems evidently make but one, as I have said;
whence it clearly follows that the blood that circulates there must
be entirely of the same nature, that there cannot be two kinds in the
fœtus, as there always is in the adult. This is, in fact, a remarkable
difference between the two ages. 1st. I have many times dissected small
Guinea pigs in the womb of the mother; their vessels have uniformly
contained the same fluid, which is blackish, like the venous blood of
the adult. This experiment is easy. The abdomen of the mother being
divided, we successively open each of the separate sacs that the womb
has for each fœtus. When one of these sacs is laid open, we cut the
membranes, then the abdomen of the small animal, leaving the umbilical
vessels untouched. The transparency of the parts easily allows us to
see the uniformity of the colour of the blood of the vena cava and
the aorta. The same remark applies to the superior parts. The carotid
and jugular pour out the same blood when they are opened. 2d. I have
three times made the same observation upon the fœtus of a dog. 3d. We
know that the blood of the umbilical arteries is always black; all
accoucheurs have remarked this. 4th. The change of the black blood
to red arises from the contact of air in the lungs; the fœtus not
breathing, cannot then have this kind of blood. 5th. I have dissected
many fœtuses that have died in the womb of the mother; the blood of the
veins and the arteries has appeared to me to be uniformly the same.
It is true that this is not a very conclusive proof, since the mere
standing of the red blood in the vessels, for a considerable length of
time, is sufficient to make it black, as Hunter has observed.

The preceding facts are sufficient to establish incontestibly the
uniformity of the blood in the two systems of the fœtus; an uniformity
that exists at least in external appearance, if it is not real in its
intimate composition. It is for the chemists to elucidate this point.

How is it, that the instant the black blood enters the system of red
blood in the adult, alarming consequences follow, soon asphyxia, then
death, take place, whilst in the fœtus, the black blood circulates with
impunity in the arteries? It is a difficult question to resolve, and
yet these two contradictory facts are equally true. The difference of
the nature of the blood of the fœtus might perhaps serve to remove this
difficulty, if we better understood this difference. In fact, though
the colour assimilates this blood with that of the veins of the adult,
yet it does not appear to be the same; it has an unctuous feel, unlike
the other. It is never found in the dead body coagulated like it,
but always fluid, like the blood of those who have died of asphyxia.
Fourcroy discovered no fibrin in it; he observed that it did not take
the vermilion colour by the contact of the air; that it contained
no phosphoric salts, &c. It is then very probable that if the black
blood is fatal in the arteries of the adult, whilst it circulates with
impunity in those of the fœtus, that it arises from the difference of
the nature of the one and the other. Besides, observe that there is a
very great difference in the functions of the fœtus and the adult. The
first scarcely has animal life; it wants many functions of organic.
The relation of the organs with each other, is of a nature wholly
different from what it will be after birth. No kind of analogy ever can
be established between the fœtus and the infant in this respect. Thus
we have observed that the experiments upon life and death give a result
wholly different in animals with red and warm blood, and in those with
red and cold, which approximate nearly the organization of the fœtus
in some respects. We cannot then establish any kind of parallel in
respect to the injury of the respiratory phenomena, between the fœtus
and the infant, an injury, the causes of which I have sought in my
experiments, since the organization relative to these phenomena differ
so essentially in the one and the other.

Although, as I have said, the blood of the two vascular systems is
confounded in the fœtus, yet there is, especially in the first periods,
a kind of separation in the general mass of blood, a separation that
was first accurately observed by Sabatier, and which is the result
of the arrangement of the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus.
This separation divides the mass of blood into two. The following is
the manner in which the circulation of the blood is performed in this
respect.

1st. All the blood that the trunk of the inferior vena cava receives,
either from the capillary system of the inferior extremities, or from
that of the abdomen, or from the placenta by the umbilical vein,
instead of stopping in the right auricle, as in the adult, passes
entire into the left through the foramen ovale, the superior edge
of which is so arranged, that nothing can mix with the blood of the
superior vena cava; so that when we examine attentively, we see that
it is really with the left auricle that the inferior vena cava is
continued. Hence why this auricle is in proportion as much dilated as
the right; for it would be very contracted, if it had only to receive
the blood of the pulmonary veins, the quantity of which is merely
nothing in the first periods of life. From this auricle the blood
passes to the left ventricle, which transmits it to the aorta, where it
meets the carotids and subclavians, which, by numerous ramifications,
carry it to the capillary system of the head and the superior
extremities.

2d. After having remained in this system, the blood returns by the
different branches of the superior vena cava to the right auricle,
where the superior edge of the foramen ovale prevents it from
communicating with the other blood; from this auricle it passes to the
ventricle, which transmits it to the pulmonary artery, which sends
a small part of it that returns to the left auricle by the veins of
the same name, but transmits almost the whole of it by the ductus
arteriosus to the descending aorta, below the origin of the carotids
and the subclavians, which carry the other blood. This is carried by
the branches and ramifications of the aorta to the capillary system
of the abdomen and inferior extremities; the remainder is afterwards
carried by the umbilical artery and lost in the placenta.

It follows from what we have just said, that notwithstanding the
continuity of the two great sanguineous systems in the fœtus, there is
in the first months after conception, a kind of separation of the blood
they contain; that there is even if we may so say, two systems wholly
different from those which will afterwards exist in a separate manner
in the adult.

The first of these systems has, 1st, for origin all the capillaries
of the abdomen, of the inferior extremities, and even those of the
placenta; 2d, for common trunks, below the inferior vena cava, above
the quadruple branch called the aorta; 3d, for agent of impulse the
left side of the heart; 4th, for termination all the capillaries of
the head and the superior parts. The second commences in these last
capillaries, and is composed, 1st, for its trunks, of the superior vena
cava and the descending aorta; 2d, for its agent of impulse, of the
right side of the heart; 3d, for its termination, of the capillaries of
the inferior parts.

The blood is then evidently divided in the first months after
conception into two circulations, which cross, if it may be so said,
in the form of the figure 8, as has been remarked by Sabatier; it is
carried in each, from one assemblage of capillaries to another of the
same vessels. Only instead of moving between the pulmonary capillary
system and the general one, as in the adult, it moves between the
superior and inferior part of this last system; we may then say in this
point of view that the inferior and superior parts of the body are in
opposition in the fœtus, as the lungs in the adult are in opposition to
the rest of the body.

This complete opposition on the part of the circulation, between the
upper and lower part of the body, in the first months of the fœtus,
is probably the origin of the difference that takes place afterwards
between these parts.

All physicians have observed this difference in diseases. If the
median line frequently separates the affections of the right side
from those of the left, the diaphragm seems often to be the boundary
of many diseases. Who does not know, that scorbutic affections appear
particularly below, that serous infiltrations are most frequent there,
and that ulcers are infinitely more common in the inferior extremities,
and that on the other hand, most cutaneous eruptions take place in the
superior parts, &c.? Bordeu, who has said much of the division of the
body into superior and inferior parts, considered one pulse as the
precursor of evacuations from above, and another as that of those from
below, he has however without doubt exaggerated this opposition of the
two parts of the body; still it really exists, and I think that it is
very probable, that the manner of the circulation of the fœtus is the
primary source of it.

After the first months, things begin to change. The quantity of blood
passing by the pulmonary artery was at first scarcely any thing,
because the dilatation of the ductus arteriosus was so great, that it
turned almost the whole of it into the descending aorta. This canal
gradually contracting, the pulmonary arteries dilate, and then more
blood goes through the lungs, and is brought by the pulmonary veins to
the left auricle, which transmits it to the left ventricle, which sends
it to the arch of the aorta; then the mechanism of the circulation
described above begins to change, and approximate that of the infant,
as we shall see.

Still this first mechanism predominates for a long time over the
second; hence it happens that during the greatest part of the time that
the infant is in the womb of the mother, it is the left ventricle that
sends the blood to the superior parts, whilst the inferior receive
theirs by the impulse of the right. Now as the parietes of the first
are evidently thicker than those of the second, and the heart is
further from the inferior than the superior parts, these last receive
a stronger impulse than the others. This perhaps is a new source of
the difference of the two halves of the body; hence nutrition is
more active in that above, hence the degree of vital energy that it
preserves a long time after birth, and which makes it susceptible, the
head especially, of many more affections than the lower half.

As the period of birth approaches, the pulmonary artery sends more
blood to the lungs, and less passes through the ductus arteriosus. For,
as I have said, it is only in a gradual manner that the whole of this
fluid, contained in the body, comes finally at birth to go through the
lungs. Though before it undergoes no alteration there, it does not
circulate the less, which is undoubtedly to habituate it to the passage
that it is constantly to take after birth. The quantity of blood then
is in a direct ratio to the age in the pulmonary artery, and in an
inverse one in the ductus arteriosus.

This arrangement evidently requires a corresponding one in the foramen
ovale; in fact, if in proportion as the ductus arteriosus contracted,
this was not diminished also, all the blood would finally accumulate in
the superior parts. For instead of passing from them to the inferior,
the whole of it would return to them by the left auricle and the
ventricle of the same side. In proportion as the ductus arteriosus
is contracted, the foramen ovale being lessened also, the blood of
the inferior vena cava, the whole of which cannot pass through there,
begins to mix with that of the superior, enters the right auricle,
then the right ventricle, afterwards returns by the lungs to the
left auricle and ventricle and the aorta. What is the consequence of
this? that this artery begins to receive from the left ventricle a
much greater quantity of blood than can pass into the carotids and
subclavians; a portion of it then goes into the descending trunk and is
distributed to the inferior parts.

From what has been said, it appears, that the two portions of the
blood of the fœtus are almost wholly separate in the first months; all
that comes from the inferior vena cava goes into the ascending aorta;
all from the superior passes into the descending, the lungs receiving
scarcely any except by the bronchial arteries for their nutrition. But
as the period of birth approaches, these two portions of blood begin
to mix, and the circulation then has an arrangement between that of
the adult and that of the first months. At birth even, the foramen
ovale and the ductus arteriosus are much contracted, the circulation
goes on in the mother's womb almost in the same way as it does after
birth; the whole difference is that the fluid is of the same nature,
because respiration has not taken place. The sudden change of the
circulation at birth, arises particularly from the introduction of
red blood into the economy. As to the mechanical phenomena, they are
gradually produced by the gradual contraction of the two openings of
communication. The blood gradually ceases to move from the inferior to
the superior capillaries; it then goes from both of these to those of
the lungs and reciprocally.

In considering the circulating phenomena, we err in supposing
that their change is sudden at birth. It is sufficient to examine
the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus at different periods
of pregnancy, to see that they contract successively, and that
consequently these phenomena are successive, so that if the fœtus
should remain in the womb a long time beyond its period, and the
contraction should continue in the foramen ovale and the ductus
arteriosus, the blood would circulate as in the adult, from
the pulmonary to the general capillary system exclusively, and
reciprocally. The only difference would be in the uniformity of its
colour, because it would pass through the first system, without coming
in contact with the air.

I do not say that the entrance of the air does not suddenly bring
to the lungs the remainder of the blood which passed by the ductus
arteriosus; but this kind of sudden turn takes place only in a part of
the blood of the pulmonary artery; a part already passed through the
lungs before birth, though the air cells were empty.

In general, there is a constant relation between the quantity of blood
that the right ventricle sends to the lungs, and that which the left
sends to the inferior parts. The more the first increases, the more
abundant is the second; this last evidently exceeds that which goes to
the superior parts. These three things, 1st, the quantity of the blood
of the inferior vena cava which mixes with that of the superior, and
passes with it into the right auricle; 2d, that which from the right
ventricle goes through the lungs and returns to the left auricle;
3d, that which from the left ventricle goes to the descending aorta,
constantly increase as the period of accouchment approaches.

The descending aorta does not undergo by these variations any change in
its caliber; in fact, it is the same thing to it, whether it receives
the blood of the ductus arteriosus, below the origin of the carotids
and subclavians, or whether this fluid comes directly to it from the
left ventricle, through its arch; its parietes constantly increase in
a uniform manner; all depends upon the successive contraction of the
ductus arteriosus and the foramen ovale.

The whole vascular system is generally remarkable in the fœtus for
its great development. The arteries are in proportion larger, which
corresponds with the size of the heart, which is much developed at this
age; it is nearly the same as the nerves in relation to the brain.

The development of the arteries however is not like that of the nerves,
nearly uniform every where. These vessels follow in general the same
order as the parts to which they are distributed. Thus in the superior
parts, the cerebral arteries are much more evident than the facial;
among these, the ophthalmic is more so than the nasal, the palatine,
&c. In the thorax, the thymic arteries are much larger in proportion
than afterwards. In the abdomen, all the gastric viscera being very
considerable, their arteries are already very large; the supra-renal
are much larger in proportion than in the adult. In the pelvis on the
contrary, the arterial system is very contracted, because the viscera
are small, as they receive but little nourishment. In the inferior
extremities, the arteries are a little more contracted in proportion
than in the superior, especially in the earlier periods, for towards
birth, the proportion is nearer equal.

The arterial texture is infinitely more pliable in the fœtus than in
the adult; it will yield more easily to extension; ligatures applied
upon the arteries break it less easily. Aneurisms are extremely rare in
infants.

Many little arteries wind upon the parietes of the great ones in the
fœtus; they are often livid, to see them distinctly, it is necessary,
as I have said, to examine them at this age. Does this abundance of
vessels dispose the arteries in the first age to inflammations, which
are so rare afterwards? I have never observed this alteration.

In the first periods of the fœtus, the layers and arterial fibres are
indistinct; we should say that the coat of the artery is homogeneous.
But it has however much more consistence than most of the surrounding
textures; this consistence corresponds with that of the heart. Destined
to distribute every where the nutritive matter, the arteries ought
necessarily to precede the other organs in their nutrition. This early
growth, always concomitant with that of the heart, would alone prove
that the arteries are made to develop themselves, and that the heart
does not hollow them out, as Haller has said, in the interior of our
organs by the force of its impulse. Besides this mechanical manner of
considering their formation is evidently contrary to the known laws of
the animal economy.


II. _State of the Vascular System with Red Blood during growth._

At the moment of birth, two great revolutions take place in the
system with red blood; 1st, a mechanical one, if it may be so said,
in the phenomena of the course of the blood; 2d, a chemical one, in
the nature of this fluid. The mechanical revolution depends upon the
entire cessation of the passage of the blood through the foramen ovale,
the ductus arteriosus, the umbilical arteries and veins. The chemical
revolution depends upon the formation of red blood. I will now examine
this last.

The fœtus finds at birth that all surrounding objects are the causes
of great excitement; the cutaneous surface, all the origins of the
mucous, are strongly stimulated. The sensations they experience are
even painful, because the difference is very great between the waters
of the amnios and the bodies with which the fœtus comes in contact at
birth, and every abrupt change in the sensations is painful. Habit
soon familiarizes this sensation; but it is not less real at birth,
and it may be said that this moment is as painful for the infant as
the mother. Now, as every lively sensation is generally accompanied
with great motions a general agitation succeeds the impression that the
fœtus perceives from without; all the muscles move, the intercostals
and the diaphragm like the others. The air which already filled the
mouth and wind-pipe, then enters the lungs, and there colours the blood
red, then it is alternately expired and inspired until death. The first
inspiration then is, in this point of view, a phenomenon analogous
to all the motions that the change of external excitement suddenly
produces at birth in the voluntary muscles of the fœtus.

The respiratory motion is, however, too important, since it commences
a new kind of relation between the organs, to depend exclusively upon
this cause. I presume that an unknown principle, a kind of instinct,
induces the fœtus at the moment of birth, to contract the intercostals
and diaphragm. This instinct, which I do not understand, and of which
I cannot give the least idea, is the same that makes the infant the
moment it comes from its mother's womb, contract its lips, as if to
nurse. We certainly cannot say that this motion is an effect of the
very acute external impressions that it feels; these impressions
produce agitations, irregular motions, as if to get rid of these
impressions, and not a uniform motion evidently directed towards
a determinate object. If we examine all animals separately at the
instant of their birth, we shall see that every one performs particular
motions, directed by its instinct. The small quadrupeds seek the breast
of their mother; the gallinaceous animals the grain that is to nourish
them; the small carnivorous birds immediately open their bills, as if
to receive the prey the mother is afterwards to bring to them in the
nest, &c.

In general, it is essential to distinguish accurately the motions,
which, at the instant of birth, arise from new excitements that the
body of the fœtus receives, from those which are the result of a kind
of instinct, of a cause of which we are ignorant. I believe that the
respiratory motion belongs at the same time to the two causes, and more
especially perhaps to the last.

I pass now to the mechanical revolutions of the course of the blood. At
the instant the lungs change to red the black blood that enters them
by the pulmonary arteries, they receive all that which before passed
through the ductus arteriosus; this ceases to transmit any to the
aorta, though, however, it often remains still more or less dilated;
for at birth it is hardly ever entirely obliterated; this contraction
varies singularly at this period. Why does the blood then cease to
flow there? As the aliments do not enter the ductus choledochus, the
lacteal or pancreatic ducts, though they pass their orifices; so
undoubtedly this takes place, because the kind of sensibility of the
ductus arteriosus repels the new venous blood of the fœtus, which comes
no longer from the placenta, because that which the lungs have reddened
will not mix with it. We cannot certainly give any mechanical reason
for its not passing; it really does not, and it evidently depends
upon the vital laws. Besides, the motion of which the lungs become
the seat, the dilatation, and especially the new excitement that the
external air produces there, by rendering considerably more active the
capillary circulation, facilitate that of the two pulmonary trunks, and
give the blood a tendency to pass there rather than through the ductus
arteriosus; it is in this way that the lungs attract, as I have said,
the blood from the pulmonary artery. Does not the great irritation,
of which certain tumours are the seat, draw there more of this fluid?
Is it not on this account that the arteries of these tumours dilate
and acquire a double or even treble caliber? What takes place in these
tumours in a gradual manner, happens suddenly to the blood that still
passes by the ductus arteriosus at birth, and which was very much
diminished, as I have said, by the successive contraction of this canal.

For the same reason that all the blood of the pulmonary artery goes
through the lungs, the foramen ovale is closed; in fact, this foramen
is so arranged at birth, that its valves approximate so as to cross,
as it were; so that when they are pressed against each other, the
communication of the auricles is really closed. Now the red blood
entering the left auricle by the pulmonary veins, pushes the valve of
the foramen ovale corresponding to this auricle, against the other,
and consequently opposes the blood of the vena cava inferior that
endeavours to enter there. This blood flows back to the right auricle.
Now when this contracts to drive the blood into the ventricle, far from
forcing it through the foramen ovale, it necessarily brings the two
valves against each other, and obliterates it. By examining with care
the state of the heart of the fœtus, it is evident that when the blood
enters the left auricle by the pulmonary veins, the right by the venæ
cavæ and the valves are crossed, it is impossible that the blood can
pass them either in contraction or dilatation.

Though the foramen ovale may be open at birth, still the black blood
ceases to pass through it; I say further, oftentimes this foramen
remains open during the whole of life. Many authors have related
examples of this. I have seen a great number, though this assertion may
appear extravagant at first. It is impossible from the arrangement of
its two valves, for the blood to pass through it. When the two auricles
contract at the same time, the blood which is forced by them from
without within, brings the valves together, and thus itself creates
an obstacle to its passage. In the greatest number of cases, the
adhesion of the two valves crossed, is extremely weak; they are rather
in contact than united; so that by forcing between them the handle of
a scalpel, they are easily separated and hardly any traces of rupture
are found. If they were arranged so that the blood could insinuate
itself between them, it would soon separate them and re-establish the
communication. Authors need no longer attempt to explain, how life is
supported when the foramen ovale is open; it is the same as if it was
closed, no more blood passes through it.

The obliteration of the foramen ovale, and the cessation of the passage
of the blood through its opening, are, as we see, phenomena to a
certain degree mechanical. The vital laws perform also, without doubt,
their part on this occasion. Who knows if the sensibility of the left
auricle, stimulated and modified anew by the red blood, does not repel
the black which tries to enter it by the foramen ovale? We see every
day in the economy, fluids passing at the side of openings, without
entering them, though they may be wide, for the sole reason that their
sensibility is not in relation with these fluids. Why does the trachea
convulsively reject all fluids and solids? why does the air alone enter
it? Why does not the blood enter the thoracic duct, which is often
furnished with a valve, as I have observed, incapable of opposing its
passage, and sometimes even has none? Why does the urethra repel the
urine in coition? It is a fault of all authors that they seek only for
mechanical causes in all the phenomena of the circulation. Without
doubt the course of the blood is a mechanical phenomenon; but the
laws that govern this course are vital; it is the same as a bone that
is moved by muscular contraction; the effect is the mechanism of the
lever; the cause is vital.

The blood no longer passing through the ductus arteriosus, this closes
immediately by its contractility of texture; it becomes a kind of
ligament, which fixes to a certain degree the aorta and pulmonary
artery in their respective position. As to the obliteration of the
foramen ovale, it does not arise from this contractility; this
obliteration is not made by a contraction, but by a real agglutination
of the two valves, between which it is obliquely situated at birth.
This agglutination appears to be the effect of a pressure that is made
in an opposite direction, upon the partition between the auricles, by
the blood that each contains. In fact their fibres are so arranged that
they contract from without within; now by contracting thus, they press
from each side the blood against the partition, and consequently the
two valves against each other. Now this agglutination sometimes does
not take place, whilst the contractility is always exerted when the
parts in which it exists cease to be distended; the ductus arteriosus
is uniformly obliterated.

At the same time that the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale cease to
transmit blood at birth, this fluid is stopt in the umbilical artery
and vein. Why does the blood cease to flow in this artery, though its
diameter continues very large at birth? The principal cause appears to
me to be the nature of the red blood, which is no longer in relation
with the sensibility of this artery. A proof of this is, that if some
time after the fœtus has breathed, respiration is stopt, and the black
blood consequently returns, the umbilical arteries begin to pulsate,
and if the ligature is loosened, they pour out considerable blood.
Baudelocque has frequently observed this.

In general, when respiration is well established, the blood no longer
flows by the umbilical artery, the ligature of the cord is then
useless. On the other hand, when this function is badly performed,
there is reason to fear hemorrhage of this artery. I confess, however,
that there may be other causes for this interruption of the passage of
the red blood. These four things, 1st, the cessation of the entrance
of the blood into the umbilical vein; 2d, interruption of the passage
of that of the inferior vena cava by the foramen ovale; 3d, of that
of the pulmonary artery by the ductus arteriosus; 4th, of that of the
descending aorta by the umbilical artery; these four things, I say, the
three last especially, appear to depend upon a cause that we do not yet
understand. The change of the relation of the organic sensibility with
the nature of the blood, is perhaps only accessory, since, as I have
observed, it is less this property than the action of the heart itself,
which is the cause of the circulation in the trunks. This subject
deserves the most attentive examination of physiologists.

Respiration being once well established, the lungs are in opposition to
the whole body; it sends blood to all the parts, and they all send it
to the lungs. The boundary is then rigourously established between the
system with black blood and that with red, and things then go on as we
have before described.

After birth the vascular system with red blood predominates for some
time by its greater development and its more numerous branches, in
fact the red blood enters more parts then than it does afterwards.
It is sufficient to dissect living animals of different ages, to be
convinced of the greater quantity of blood in young animals, that the
system contains, of which we are treating; so that, as I have said
elsewhere, the two opposite ages of life exhibit an inverse arrangement
as it respects the fluids and solids. The first are much more abundant
towards the period of conception. The second always predominate more
towards the last age.

The predominance of the system with red blood remains evident to the
end of the period of growth. We see the necessity of this predominance
to distribute to all the parts the materials of their nutrition and
growth; in fact, in the adult the arteries contain only what is
destined to the first. In the infant, they contain moreover what
is destined to the second. Hence the caliber of the arteries is
proportionably larger than afterwards, in order to contain more fluid.
Injections demonstrate this; and on this account small subjects are
not less favourable for the study of the arteries, than of that of the
nerves. These vessels are more prominent in them; only the surrounding
parts being less developed, we cannot see the connexions so well.

In proportion as the infant advances in age, the equilibrium is
gradually established in the system with red blood. In the head,
the facial arteries are more evident, and come gradually in their
development to the level of the cerebral. In the thorax, the thymus
diminishing as the lungs increase, their nutritive arteries follow
an inverse order; the bronchials dilate and the thymic contract. In
the abdomen less blood goes to the capsular arteries; but most of the
others receive as much of it. The pelvis and the inferior extremities
have more of it, and their development is proportionably evident.


III. _State of the Vascular System with Red Blood after growth._

It is about the period of puberty that the increase in height ceases;
the increase in thickness continues always. The genital parts, hitherto
without influence, seem to be then a centre of more active vitality
than most of the other organs. The portion of the system with red blood
that belongs to them, then becomes greater. The first effect that
results from it is the secretion of semen, and a general impulse of the
individual towards new tastes and desires, towards those relative to
the propagation of the species.

Another phenomenon is soon the consequence of this. As the lungs are
connected in an intimate, though unknown manner, with the genital
parts, they acquire also a predominance with them. Their vital energy
is increased, and then begins the period of the affections of this
viscus; then, the cause that would in the adult produce a gastric
affection, brings on a pulmonary one.

It is truly only at this period, that the predominance of the superior
parts, of the head especially, ceases entirely. Thus whilst in infancy
the nose is frequently the seat of hemorrhage, in youth it takes place
particularly from the lungs. We may consider the increase of the energy
of the lungs, which happens shortly after puberty, as the termination
of the predominance of the superior parts. The cutaneous eruptions of
the cranium, tinea capitis, &c. cease to be as frequent. Convulsions,
and all the diseases that arise from the extreme susceptibility of the
brain, become also more rare, and seem to give place to a great number
of acute pulmonary affections.

It is towards this period, that is, some time after the end of
the increase in height, that the diseases that are considered as
the product of an arterial plethora, begin especially to manifest
themselves; this may be said to be their age, and it arises from the
following cause; as the blood contains before puberty, not only the
materials of nutrition, but also those of growth, and whilst this
continued the whole is expended in the system with red blood. But when
the parts cease to increase in length, if this system still continues
to receive the materials of growth, a true arterial plethora takes
place. About the end of growth generally, some affections appear that
indicate a predominance of the blood; as this is however under the
influence of temperament, of the mode of life hitherto led, of the
season and a thousand other causes, which, making the phenomena of the
animal economy vary, rarely permit us to establish exclusive general
principles. Thus all that is said upon the disposition to different
diseases, in the different ages, &c. is subject to many exceptions.

The predominance of the lungs is gradually lost; the equilibrium is
established among all the organs, which, hitherto had each performed
a part more or less conspicuous in the phenomena relative to the
different ages. As the system with red blood is uniformly, in every
part, in proportion to its growth, to which it especially contributes,
the equilibrium is in that way established between the different
parts at twenty-six or thirty years of age; all the arteries have a
proportional size, analogous to what they will always have afterwards.
Whilst until then, some predominated, according to the predominance of
the growth of the organs to which they are sent.

Towards the fortieth year, the gastric viscera seem to acquire a more
decided vital activity; but this activity has no influence upon the
size of the arteries that are distributed to these viscera.

Though the growth in height may end about the sixteenth or seventeenth
year, that in thickness uniformly continues; so that the internal
viscera still grow, and their arteries consequently enlarge, until
the last growth ceases. This phenomenon has constantly struck me, in
comparing arteries injected in subjects from sixteen to twenty years,
with those in subjects beyond thirty-six or forty. In the last they are
uniformly larger. It is this difference that first gave me the idea
of distinguishing growth, into that in height, and that in thickness.
For the development of the arteries is the constant index of the state
of the growth of the organs. The period of the cessation of growth in
thickness is then remarkable, 1st, by the cessation of the increase of
the caliber of the arteries; 2d, by the general equilibrium that is
established in their development.

As the arteries grow in the years that succeed the end of the growth
of the body, they increase in compactness and thickness. Their fibres
become more evident; their elasticity increases; their pliability is
lessened; hence why the age of the adult is that of aneurisms. Observe
that the density of the arteries follows, in its augmentation, the same
proportion as the fleshy fibres of the heart; so that as this is more
able to send the blood with force, these are more able to resist it.


IV. _State of the Vascular System with Red Blood during old age._

In the last years, the system with red blood is remarkable for the
following phenomena.

The number of the arterial ramifications is much diminished. As the
heart loses its energy, it sends less blood, and with less force. The
general vibration that it produces in the whole arterial tree, is less
felt at the extremities of this tree. The small vessels that form
these extremities gradually contract, are obliterated and become so
many little ligaments. Hence why, when the periosteum is separated from
the bone, the dura mater from the internal surface of the cranium, only
a few drops of blood escape; why the skin, having hardened like horn,
no longer exhibits the rosy tint of the preceding ages, especially of
youth; why the section of a bone does not furnish hardly any blood,
whilst it was so abundant in the fœtus; why the mucous surfaces look
pale, the muscles have a dull colour, &c. All anatomists know that
injections succeed less in proportion, as the subjects are more
advanced in years; that in extreme old age the trunks alone are filled;
that the fluids never enter the ramifications; that it is the reverse
in young subjects; that even coarse injections oftentimes so fill the
ramifications, as to render dissection difficult. I have dissected
many old living animals; and the small quantity of blood their vessels
contain compared with those of young animals is very remarkable. The
general proposition that I have established, viz. that the solids
are constantly acquiring the predominance, is perfectly true. This
obliteration of the small vessels is remarkable even upon the parietes
of the great vessels; we see it in the dead body; I have observed it in
the living.

The less quantity of red blood that is found proportionably in old age,
is referable especially to the state of nutrition, which is merely
nothing when compared with that of infancy. Observe also, that united
with the weakness of the motion that animates the blood, it is a cause
of the small degree of excitement which the parts have in old age. In
fact the use of the circulation is not only to carry to the different
parts the materials of the secretions, of exhalations, nutrition,
&c. we shall see that it keeps them also in a state of constant
excitement by the shock it gives them at its entrance, a shock, the
principle of which is evidently in the heart. Now this shock is in a
ratio compounded, 1st, of the quantity of the fluid; 2d, of the force
with which it is sent. In both respects, the excitement constantly
diminishes, as age advances. Observe also that all the functions of the
infant, both organic and animal, are characterized by a vivacity and
impetuosity that form a remarkable contrast with the slowness and want
of energy of those of old people.

The arterial texture always becomes more and more condensed as age
advances. The layers that form the fibres of the peculiar membrane
become drier, if I may be allowed the expression.

I have said that the internal membrane is very often the seat of a
kind of peculiar ossification, which has hardly any influence upon the
circulation, except when it is seated at the origin of the aorta.

The caliber of the arteries does not dilate in old age. There is
scarcely any except the arch of the aorta, which constantly undergoes
an enlargement more or less considerable, which is always without
rupture of the fibres, consequently supposes an extensibility of these
fibres, and undoubtedly depends upon the habitual and direct impulse
that the blood exerts against the concave side of this curvature. I
have often examined to see if there was a similar dilatation at those
places in the arteries where the curves are very evident, in the
internal carotid, for example, at the place where it passes through the
carotid foramen; I have not discovered any.

In the last periods, the pulse is remarkable for its extreme slowness;
a phenomenon opposite to that of infancy, in which the blood moves with
great quickness. These two opposite facts are, after what we have said,
foreign to the arteries. They indicate only the state of the forces of
the heart, which is the agent of the general impulse of the red blood.

It is the same of the pulse in the last periods of life. It is not a
real pulsation of the arteries; it is a kind of undulation, of weak
oscillatory motion, and the more obscure, as life is more feeble. Now
I am convinced that the heart alone is the agent of this undulation; I
am convinced of it by the following very simple experiment. I have laid
bare in many dogs, on one hand the carotid, on the other the heart by a
section of one side of the thorax, made in such a manner that the other
can still perform respiration. By placing the finger upon the artery,
I observed that as long as the heart beat by a sudden impulse, that
the pulse was kept up as usual, that it was even accelerated, because
the contact of the air increased the quickness of the contractions of
the heart; but at the end of a little time, this organ began to be
weakened in its motions, then it contracted by a kind of general tremor
of its fibres. In proportion as the weakness of the motions of the
heart increased, the pulse was successively weakened. Then when the
tremor extended to all its fibres, the pulsation of the artery changed
to a kind of undulation, of feeble oscillation, the precursor of the
cessation of all motion.

I shall observe, under the system of the muscles of organic life,
that the heart has many kinds of contraction. The principal are, 1st,
that which it ordinarily has, in which there is a contraction and a
dilatation that succeed suddenly and regularly; 2d, that in which
these two motions, retaining their natural character, are irregularly
connected; 3d, those in which the fibres only oscillate, and by which
the cardiac cavities a little contracted, communicate to the blood
a less sudden shock, a general tremor, an undulation, &c. Now with
each kind of motion of the heart, there is a peculiar pulse that
corresponds. It is easy to be convinced of this upon living animals.

I am astonished that authors who have disputed so much upon the cause
of this phenomenon, have not thought of having recourse to experiment
to elucidate the question. There are undoubtedly many modifications in
the pulse, whose coincidence with the motions of the heart could not
be perceived; but that of the slow and frequent pulse, the strong and
weak, the intermittent, undulatory, &c. can be immediately discovered,
by laying the heart bare and placing the finger at the same time upon
the artery. We see then uniformly, during the moments that precede
death, that whatever may be the modification of the arterial pulsation,
there is always an analogous modification in the motions of the heart;
this certainly would not be the case, if the pulse depended especially
upon the vital contraction of the arteries. I have had occasion to make
these experiments many times, either directly for this object, or with
others in view; I have seen the motion of the heart always correspond
with that of the arteries. In general the theory of the pulse requires
as I have said, new researches; but I have facts enough upon this point
to be convinced that the varieties it undergoes in the different ages,
as under other circumstances, depend almost exclusively upon the heart,
which produces in particular this kind of undulation, of oscillatory
motion which is between the pulsation of the natural state and the
complete cessation of this pulsation.


V. _Accidental development of the System with Red Blood._

I shall speak under the organic muscles, of the accidental development
of the left portion of the heart. As to the arteries, new ones are
never formed; but oftentimes, those that do exist acquire a remarkable
size; this depends on two causes, 1st, on an obstruction to the course
of the blood; 2d, on the growth of any tumour.

1st. The dilatation of the arteries by an obstruction to the
circulation, is evident in the ligature of aneurismatic arteries, in
the spontaneous cure of aneurisms, a phenomenon of which within a
few years a great number of examples has been published, &c. Then,
sometimes the great collaterals increase in size, sometimes their
caliber remains the same, and it is by the ramifications that the
communications are made. As the branches dilate, their thickness
increases in proportion with their breadth; at least I have twice
observed this fact, which is analogous to that which the left ventricle
presents when it becomes aneurismatic.

2d. All tumours do not produce a dilatation of the arteries; we see
this dilatation in cancers, in those of the breast, of the womb, &c.
in osteo-sarcosis or spina ventosa, in the different fungi, &c. In
general, most tumours that give great pain to the patients exhibit this
phenomenon. We should say even that pain in a part is sufficient to
attract there habitually more blood, and dilate the arteries; we know
that in the operation for lithotomy, when the patients have previously
suffered much, hemorrhage is often more to be feared.

After long and copious secretions or exhalations, I have not observed
that the arteries were more dilated in the glands or around the
exhalant organs. How large soever the cysts may be, their parietes
never contain arteries proportioned to those that are developed in
cancerous tumours. The cerebral in hydrocephalus, the mediastinal,
intercostals, &c. in hydro-thorax, the mesenteric, the lumbar, the
stomachic, the epigastric, &c. in ascites, the spermatic in hydrocele,
the renal in diabetes, the branches that go to the parotids after
a long salivation, retain their ordinary size, and under some
circumstances they become even smaller.

When the arteries dilate in tumours, do their parietes thicken in
proportion, as in the preceding case? I have no data, from which I
could determine this point.


VASCULAR SYSTEM

WITH BLACK BLOOD.


The red blood circulates in a single system, the branches of which
every where communicate. The black blood on the contrary is contained
in two separate systems, which have nothing in common but the form, and
which are, 1st, the general system; 2d, the abdominal. We shall now
examine the first, and afterwards the second.

The general vascular system with black blood arises as we shall see,
from the whole of the great capillary system, is collected towards the
heart in great trunks, and terminates in the pulmonary capillaries. As
the portion of the heart that belongs to it will be examined hereafter,
and the pulmonary artery, by its peculiar membrane, has great analogy
with the peculiar membrane of the other arteries, we shall now
particularly examine the veins; but we shall describe in a general
manner, the common membrane that is spread upon the whole system with
black blood.


ARTICLE FIRST.

SITUATION, FORMS, DIVISION AND GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE VASCULAR
SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.

We shall now examine the veins as we have the arteries, in their
origin, course and termination. Only we shall do it inversely, to
accommodate our ideas to the course in which the blood flows in their
channels.


I. _Origin of the Veins._

This origin is in the general capillary system. I shall point out in
this system, how the veins are continued with the arteries. I would
only remark here that these vessels never arise from any organ that
the arteries do not enter, as the tendons, the cartilages, the hair,
&c.; which evidently proves that the blood is not formed in the general
capillary system; it leaves there the principles that made it red, it
perhaps acquires there new ones; it is modified in fact, but never
created.

It is not as easy to distinguish accurately the veins at their exit
from this system, as it is the last arteries at their entrance into it,
because the valves prevent injections from penetrating so far. It is
in subjects that have died of asphyxia, apoplexy, &c. that the venous
ramifications can be best observed. We see then that they are soon
divided into two orders; one accompanies the last arteries, the other
is distinct from them.

In the greatest number of organs, venous branches go out at the same
place that the arteries enter. There are however some exceptions to
this rule. In the brain, for example, the arteries enter below, the
veins go out above. In the liver, the first enter below, the others go
off behind, &c. This circumstance is, in general, indifferent to the
circulation, which goes on the same whatever may be the relation of
the arteries with the veins. In those places where the small veins go
out at the same time that the small arteries enter, sometimes more or
less of cellular texture serves to unite the small vessels that are in
apposition, sometimes there is a space between them, as in the muscles,
the nerves, &c.

Besides the venous origins corresponding with the arterial
terminations, there is an order of veins which is separated from
the arteries at the exit from the capillary system. This order is
particularly remarkable at the exterior of the body. We see that all
the organs that are found there furnish, 1st, veins that go to the
interior to accompany the arteries; 2d, others that go to the exterior
to become sub-cutaneous, and to form trunks of which we shall soon
speak. In many internal organs, the same venous division is observed.

It follows from this general arrangement, that many more veins go from
the capillary system than there are arteries that enter it. This is the
principle of the disproportion of the capacity existing between the
system with red blood, and that with black, a disproportion of which we
shall soon speak.

The veins at their origin frequently communicate among themselves. We
see many little spaces that arise from their interlacing, in the places
where they can be seen, as under the serous surfaces, &c.


II. _Course of the Veins._

At their exit from the general capillary system, as we have just
said, the veins are differently arranged. 1st. In the extremities
and external organs of the trunk, they form two sets, the one
interior, which accompanies the arteries; the other exterior, which is
sub-cutaneous. 2d. In the internal organs we frequently make a similar
observation; thus there are superficial veins of the kidney, and deep
ones, that accompany the arteries; but oftentimes all the veins unite
themselves to those that follow the artery.

The cutaneous portion of the veins is very remarkable in the
extremities, where there are considerable branches, viz. the saphena
in the lower, the cephalic, basilic, and their numerous divisions
in the superior. In the trunk and the head, we do not see any great
sub-cutaneous branches, except the external jugular in the neck; but
there is a number of smaller branches proportioned to the minuter ones
that are distributed there.

The external parts, then, are remarkable by the predominance of the
trunks with black blood over those with red. Oftentimes these trunks
can be traced through the integuments, upon which they show themselves
much more than those that are whiter and more delicate; they have,
besides, no connexion with the tinge that colours them, which arises
from the blood contained in the general capillary system.

In the interior of the body, the veins almost every where accompany
the arteries; they follow the same distribution; so that they are not
commonly described, because the course of the arteries is sufficient
to represent theirs. Usually a common cellular space receives both the
trunks of the two sorts of vessels and those of the nerves. Sometimes,
however, the veins are separate, as the azygos, for example, which has
no corresponding arterial trunk, and which on this account requires in
descriptive anatomy, like the superficial ones of the trunk and the
extremities, a particular examination and an accurate dissection to
obtain an idea of it.

The deep-seated veins have a caliber much more considerable than
that of the arteries; most usually they are more numerous, as in the
extremities, where each artery is almost always accompanied by two
veins.


III. _Proportion of the capacity of the two systems with Black and Red
Blood._

After the observation I have just made upon the origin and course of
the veins, it is evident that their sum total has a capacity much
greater than that of the arteries. This assertion it is easy to prove
in detail, wherever there is an artery and vein united, as in the
kidneys, the spleen, the extremities, &c.; where the arteries are
separate from the veins, as in the brain, the liver, &c. it is not
less sensible. Finally, there is, as I have just said, a division of
sub-cutaneous veins, which is evidently one more than the arteries have.

Many physiologists have endeavoured to calculate the relation of
capacity between the two systems with black and red blood; but this
relation varies too much ever to be the subject of any calculation.
Is it upon the dead body that the attempt is made? But the veins will
be more or less dilated according to the kind of death; in apoplexy,
asphyxia, drowning, &c. they have a diameter almost double that which
they exhibit when the subject has died of hemorrhage, because the first
kind of death accumulates much blood in the veins, and the second
deprives them of it. We can give a greater or less capacity to the
veins of an animal, according to the manner in which we kill him, as
we can enlarge or contract the right cavities of the heart by similar
means. You can never find the veins exactly equal in any two subjects,
though there may be a great resemblance as to size, age, &c. Is it
upon a living animal that the attempt is made? But, besides its being
very difficult, you will not then have a result uniformly applicable,
because the veins vary in diameter as they are more or less full.
Examine these vessels in subjects in whom you can see them by the
transparency of the integuments; sometimes they are more, sometimes
less apparent; their size sometimes appears double, at others, hardly
distinguishable. Certainly after drinking copiously, by which the black
blood has received a great augmentation of its fluid, the vessels
are more dilated than in an opposite state. The veins are remarkably
contracted after death from hunger. I have often observed the same
phenomenon in dropsies, phthisis, marasmus, &c. Always when the mass
of blood is diminished, the veins contract by their contractility
of texture. The arteries are infinitely less subject to variations
of diameter, on account of their firm and compact texture, though,
however, they show much of it.

Let us reject, then, every kind of calculation upon the proportions
of capacity of organized canals. We can only calculate what is fixed
and invariable; but that which varies at every instant can only be
the object of general assertion. Besides, of what importance are the
rigorous proportions that some physicians have endeavoured to establish
between our parts? They are nothing in the explanation of the phenomena
of health and disease. Let us, then, be content with this general
assertion, that the venous capacity surpasses the arterial. It may be
said, that in a given time there is more blood in one than the other.

The same observation applies to the two sides of the heart, one of
which belongs to the same system with the veins, and the other to the
one with the arteries. The right has commonly a greater capacity than
the left, not precisely under the relation of the fleshy texture, but
under that of the fluid that distends it; this is so true, that if in
an animal whose thorax is opened, the blood is made to accumulate in
the left side by ligatures, and the right is emptied by puncturing
it, the last will be less in size than the first. Always when we find
it larger than the other in the dead body, except in diseases of the
heart, it is because it contained more blood at the moment of death; in
fact, as this fluid ordinarily stops first in the lungs, it flows back
to this side of the heart, which is almost always the largest.

This is the great difference between inert cavities and those that
possess life, viz. that these last can change their capacity every
moment, whilst the others remain always the same. In the living animal,
the right side of the heart has almost always a greater capacity than
the left, because the quantity of blood it contains is greater.

There are, then, two things generally true, viz. 1st, that the great
tree that terminates the system with red blood is in general of less
capacity than the great tree that commences the system with black
blood; 2d, that the same observation is applicable to the two sides of
the heart, which correspond with these two trees.

As to the tree that terminates the system with black blood, compared
with that which commences the system with red blood, the same thing
does not hold true. The pulmonary artery and the veins of the same
name exhibit a disproportion of capacity, less it is true, than in
the other parts, a disproportion which is real, however, and which,
notwithstanding what many authors have said, is in favour of the veins.
How does this happen? it would seem that since the one is continuous
with the veins and propels the same fluids, it ought to have the same
proportion of diameter; and that since the others are continuous with
the arteries, that they also should be in proportion to them. This
arises from the difference of the velocity of the blood; in fact, this
fluid circulates quicker in the pulmonary artery than in the veins
of the same name, since it has the impulse of the heart, which these
last want; then, in a given time, as great a quantity of blood passes
through it, though the diameter of this artery is smaller; what do I
say? if it was equal, the circulation could not go on. In the same way,
if the aorta equalled in capacity the two venæ cavæ and the coronaries
united, and the blood had the same velocity there, the circulation
would cease.

The four pulmonary veins united are a little larger than the aorta,
which, however, transmits all the blood received from them. Why?
Because the impulse that the left ventricle communicates, makes, in a
given time, more blood pass by the aorta than by the four pulmonary
veins. These two things, 1st, the velocity of the fluid; 2d, the
capacity of the cavities in which it circulates, are then in an inverse
order in the two opposite trees that form each vascular system. In that
with red blood, there is less velocity and greater capacity from the
pulmonary capillary system to the agent of impulse; and from this agent
to the general capillary system, there is, on the contrary, greater
velocity and less capacity. In the vascular system with black blood,
there is less velocity and greater capacity from the general capillary
system to the agent of impulse; and from this agent to the pulmonary
capillary system, there is more velocity and less capacity. Without
this double opposite arrangement, it is evident that the circulation
could not take place.

There is, however, a remark to be made upon this subject; it is, that
the capacity of the four pulmonary veins united, is not so much larger
than the aorta as that of the venæ cavæ and the coronary is than the
pulmonary artery; and this is the reason of it; as the pulmonary
veins run a very short course, the impulse, on the one hand, that
the red blood has received from the pulmonary capillary system, is
preserved there more; on the other hand, this fluid is there free from
numerous causes of delay that the blood experiences in the venæ cavæ
and coronaries; then the velocity is greater there, and the capacity
should be therefore less. If the lungs were situated in the pelvis, the
pulmonary veins would certainly have a greater capacity, because having
a greater extent to go over, the velocity of the blood would be more
retarded.

We can easily understand now the cause of many arrangements that have
engaged the attention of anatomists; viz. 1st, why the sum of the
arteries coming from the aorta has less capacity than that of the veins
going to the right auricle; 2d, why the four pulmonary veins surpass
also in diameter the artery of the same name; 3d, why these four
veins are not exactly in proportion with the aorta, which is really
a continuation of them; 4th, why the venæ cavæ and coronaries are so
disproportioned to the pulmonary artery, which is, as it were, their
continuation.

If there was no agent of impulse in the two systems with red and black
blood, their capacity would be every where nearly the same, because
the velocity of the fluid would be every where nearly the same. This
is precisely what happens in the system with black abdominal blood, in
which the hepatic portion of the vena porta is nearly as large as the
intestinal one, because there is no heart between the two.

The velocity is less in the general veins and in the pulmonary, because
they have not at their extremity an agent of impulse; we see there
only a capillary system. The opposite reason explains the velocity of
the course of the blood in the general arteries and in the pulmonary.
We have seen in the preceding system, that the presence of an agent
of impulse at the origin of the two great arteries, requires there a
considerable resistance of this texture, whilst the absence of this
agent requires but little resistance in the veins.

We see, then, clearly, why these three things, 1st, weakness of the
parietes; 2d, slowness of the motion; 3d, great capacity, are the
attributes of the veins with black and red blood; why these three
opposite things, 1st, strength of the parietes; 2d, velocity in
the motion; 3d, less capacity, characterize the arteries of both
sanguiferous systems.

We see also from this why, though the red and black blood form in their
whole course a continued column, though the common membrane over which
they pass may be in the whole extent of each system nearly the same,
the organs exterior to this membrane are, however, very different.

The inverse ratio of the velocity of the motion with the capacity of
the vessels, appears to me so evident, that we might be able to judge
nearly by the inspection of the vessel of the velocity of the blood
that runs through it, if many causes did not, as I have said, make the
vascular parietes vary at the moment of death. We know that all the
causes that lessen in the veins the velocity of the blood, increase
their capacity; it is thus that we make them prominent by ligatures;
that pregnancy enlarges those of the inferior extremities, that
long-continued standing produces the same effect, &c.

It is to the same reason that must be referred the explanation of the
following phenomenon; viz. that the relation of the arteries and the
veins is not every where the same; thus the renal, bronchial, thymic
veins, &c. are in general smaller in proportion to their arteries, than
the veins of the spermatic cord in proportion to the artery of the same
name, than the hypogastric veins in proportion to the corresponding
artery. The blood has less difficulty in circulating in the first than
in the second, where it rises against its weight; hence why the veins
of the inferior parts, especially at a certain age, surpass their
arteries more in diameter, than those of the superior parts exceed
theirs.


_Ramifications, Small Branches, Branches, Angles of Union, &c._

The veins present in their course, as it respects branches, smaller
branches and ramifications, an arrangement analogous to that of the
arteries, except that it takes place inversely. The ramifications are
nearest the origin; they soon unite into smaller branches, these into
branches, and these last into trunks.

The ramifications and most of the small branches are found in the
interior of the organs. The first make an integral part of these
organs, and are between their fibres, &c.; the second lie in their
great interstices; in the glands between the lobes, in the brain,
between the circumvolutions, in the muscles between the fasciculi, &c.

In going out of the organs, the small venous branches run into
the branches, which take, as we have seen, two positions, one
sub-cutaneous, the other deep. The sub-cutaneous branches go in the
extremities between the aponeurosis and the skin, in the trunk between
this and the cellular layer that covers the muscles. The deep branches
lie in the interstices that the organs have between each other,
accompanying almost every where the arteries. The cerebral branches
have a peculiar arrangement; they are placed in the interstices of the
dura mater, and form with them what are called sinuses.

The venous branches differ from the arterial in this, that they are
infinitely less tortuous; this is remarkable under the skin and in
the interstices of the organs. This is a reason that would prevent
locomotion, supposing that there was an agent of impulse at the origin
of the veins, and that their parietes were not so loose. Hence a series
of arterial tubes is really longer than a corresponding series of
venous tubes; this facilitates the motion of the black blood, which has
a less extent to go over, and which besides would find causes of delay
in the curvatures, greater than the red blood, because this is driven
by a strong agent of impulse, and the other is not.

The venous branches unite to form a certain number of trunks that are
connected with those that are immediately discharged into the right
auricle; these trunks are the internal jugulars, the iliacs, the
azygos, the subclavians, &c. They are still less tortuous than the
branches; they have, like the arterial trunks, deep positions, far from
external agents, from which many organs defend them, as a hemorrhage
from them would be followed with serious consequences.

The trunks, branches, smaller branches and ramifications do not always
arise necessarily from each other, in the manner we have just pointed
out. The branches are often united to the trunks, the ramifications to
the branches, &c. &c.; as it is with regard to the arteries.

The angles of union vary; sometimes they are right angles, as in the
lumbar, renal veins, &c.; sometimes they are obtuse, as in some of the
intercostals; most commonly they are acute.

The arrangement of the smaller branches and the branches is as variable
at least in the veins as in the arteries; they partake, in this
respect, of the general character of irregularity that the organs of
internal life exhibit. It is necessary only to attend to the general
position and distribution of the branches, smaller branches, &c. Their
union with the trunks and among themselves, is different in almost
every subject.


_Forms of the Veins._

The same observation may be made upon the forms of the veins as upon
those of the arteries.

1st. A trunk, branch, &c. are cylindrical, when examined in a space
where they receive no branch. In the dead body they appear flat, which
arises from the collapse of the parietes, and this is owing to the
absence of blood. But by distending them with air, water, &c. they take
their primitive form. In the living body they appear round.

2d. Examined in a considerable extent, a venous branch appears conical,
so that the base of the cone is towards the heart and the apex towards
the general capillary system. This form arises from the smaller
branches, that are successively united to this branch, and increase its
capacity as it approaches the heart.

3d. Considered as a whole, the venous system represents three trunks;
one corresponds with the vena cava superior, another with the vena cava
inferior, and the third with the coronary vein; these three trunks
have their apex at the auricle and their base at the general capillary
system. Anatomists thus represent the whole of the veins, because the
sum of their divisions, like the arteries, has a greater capacity than
the trunks from which these divisions arise.

There is however an observation to be made upon this subject, and
that is, that the relation between the trunks and their divisions is
not as exact in the veins as in the arteries; thus the sum of certain
divisions considerably surpasses their trunks, whilst this relation
is infinitely less in other cases. But all this arises still from the
extreme variation of the venous parietes, according to the quantity
of blood they contain; thus in dead bodies, sometimes the branches
are much dilated by this fluid, and the trunks remain the same;
sometimes an opposite phenomenon is observed. 1st. This last takes
place especially when the lungs are obstructed; then in fact the blood
flows back to the right cavities of the heart, then into the great
corresponding venous trunks; these are then almost equal in capacity
to the divisions they furnish, sometimes they even surpass them. 2d.
When in the living subject, a limb has been situated for a long time
perpendicularly, when standing has been long continued, for example,
then the branches are more dilated than the trunks. Now as these causes
of dilatation vary ad infinitum, the dilatations themselves are very
variable.

From these varieties in the dilatation of the venous branches and
trunks separately, it is evident that the relation existing between
them is extremely variable, that it is affected by the manner of the
death, by the diseases that have preceded it, by the habits of the
subject, &c. Let us disregard then, upon this point, as upon every
other, all calculations, even if they have a solid basis, if they do
not lead to a useful result.

Injections are also a deceptive means of estimating this relation;
in fact, they dilate the trunks much more than the branches, and
especially than the smaller branches. The internal jugular injected,
for example, becomes of an enormous size when compared with the sinus
that empties into it. The two venæ cavæ, the azygos, the subclavians,
&c. dilate a little less than the jugular; but their size however is
remarkable when they are injected, in comparison with that of their
branches injected.


_Anastomoses._

The veins communicate in general more frequently than the arteries.
1st. In the ramifications there is a real net work, the anastomoses are
so numerous. 2d. In the smaller branches, they are not so frequent. 3d.
In the branches, they are still less numerous; but still we find many
of them, and it is this that particularly distinguishes these branches
from the arterial, which are almost always separate from each other.

The communications between the branches of the veins unite immediately
in an evident manner the cutaneous to the deep division; thus there
is a communication between the cerebral sinuses and the temporal,
occipital veins, &c.; between the external and internal jugular by one
and even two considerable branches; between the basilic, cephalic, and
their numerous divisions spread upon the fore arm, on the one hand; on
the other, the brachial, the radial and cubital, by different branches
that penetrate deep into the muscles; between the saphena and crural,
tibial, peroneal, by analogous branches.

Though separated, the two great venous divisions can then evidently
supply the functions of each other by mixing their blood. Hence why,
1st, by agitating the muscles of the fore arm, we increase the throw of
blood in venesection, though the muscles do not furnish many branches
to the open vein, which then receives the blood from veins, from which
it is forced out by the muscles; 2d, why in external pressure that
obstructs or even entirely stops the motion of the superficial venous
blood, the circulation continues as usual; why, for example, if a
ligature is left for a long time applied to the arm, the superficial
veins at first swelled, gradually become empty, by pouring their blood
into the deep ones; why, notwithstanding tight bandages in fractures
and luxations, the venous blood returns as usual to the heart, though
it passes in less quantity by the superficial veins. 3d. If a strong
band is applied high up on the leg, and the saphena vein is injected
below, it does not fill above the band, but the injection goes into the
crural. In the same manner the internal jugular may be filled by the
temporal, &c.

The anastomoses between the superficial and deep veins are more
necessary in man than in any other animal, on account of his clothing,
by which the neck, the ham, the arms, &c. are subjected to compressions
that would be dangerous without these anastomoses. We can say that
upon them alone is founded the possibility of a variety of modes in
clothing. That they show in fact that these modes are less dangerous
than some physicians have thought; that the danger of apoplexy from a
tight cravat, of varices from tight garters, &c. is much less than they
have said.

When a single trunk is compressed, the blood passes easily into the
neighbouring ones; but if the compression is made upon all the trunks
of a limb, a certain time is requisite for this fluid to dilate the
anastomoses. It experiences, before this dilatation takes place
completely, a kind of stoppage in the capillary system, a stoppage that
explains the momentary redness of the fore-arm in women, when the arm
is covered with too tight a sleeve, that of the hand or the foot when
the bandages of the fore-arm or the leg are too tight.

The mode of the venous anastomoses is very analogous to that of the
arteries. Sometimes the smaller branches anastomose with the trunks,
sometimes the trunks communicate among themselves.

In the last mode, 1st, there is merely a branch of communication,
and this is the most common case; we see this between the jugulars,
between the deep and superficial veins of the thigh, the arm, &c.
2d. Two branches unite by their extremities and form an arch, the
mesenterics afford an example of this. 3d. Sometimes instead of a
trunk, there is an interlacing of the smaller branches that form a real
venous plexus; such as that which surrounds the cord of the spermatic
vessels.

In general, where there are the most obstacles to the blood, there the
anastomoses are the most numerous. Hence why the veins that surround
the spermatic cord communicate so frequently together, why the smaller
branches of the hypogastric vein which are spread in the bottom of the
pelvis, form there a plexus so extended, that it is a real net work in
which the course of no one branch can be traced, so numerous are the
communications. Notwithstanding this, these two portions of the venous
system are the frequent seat of varices; they are even found more
frequently dilated in the dead body on account of the difficulty the
blood experiences there in rising against its own weight.

This leads us to a general reflection upon the venous system in
relation to the anastomoses, and that is respecting the necessity there
is for the communications being more numerous in this than in the
arterial system. In fact, if we compare the course of the black blood
with that of the red, we shall see that there are many more causes to
modify that of the first.

The black blood evidently obeys its weight in certain cases. 1st. If
we remain standing a short time the veins swell, especially after
diseases in which the forces have been diminished; this swelling
soon disappears if the leg is inclined; it increases if it remains
perpendicular. 2d. There are many cases, in which the forces being very
weak, the circulation cannot go on in perfection, except the legs are
in a horizontal or inclined position. The influence of position upon
many tumours and ulcers of the legs is undoubted. 3d. We know that the
first effect of the attitude with the head reversed, is a giddiness
produced by the difficulty the blood experiences in rising against its
weight. 4th. The valves are particularly destined to counteract the
effect of gravity.

Every violent motion communicated to the black blood, and independent
of gravity, can also disturb the course of this fluid; it is thus that
when we move violently in a circular direction, the venous cerebral
blood receives, if we may so say, a centrifugal motion, which, turning
it from its natural direction, and preventing it from going entirely to
the heart, produces a stoppage of it, and hence the dizziness that is
experienced.

It is not only gravity and every other external cause of motion, which
influence at every moment the motion of the blood in the veins, but
there are also external and internal pressures, and a variety of other
mechanical causes.

On the contrary, that of the arteries is independent of most of the
causes, of weight especially, and of the internal motion. Why? because
the rapidity of the motion is so great which the heart gives to the
red blood, that the influence of gravity and every other analogous
cause is necessarily nothing. Let us take a comparison; the greater
the force with which a projectile is thrown into the air, the less
influence the weight has in making it deviate; in the case of the blood
its influence is still less. If the blood was driven in empty vessels,
gravity would have some effect in the arteries; but in the sudden shock
impressed upon the whole fluid that fills them, a shock, the effect of
which is felt at the extremities at the same time as at the origin,
it is evident that its effect is nothing. For an opposite reason, we
can understand why it is so powerful in the veins, in which there is
no agent of impulse, in which the parietes and capillary system alone
produce the motions, where the motion is consequently slow, &c.

From these considerations, it is easy to see the reason of the very
different arrangement that the arteries and veins exhibit in their
branches, as it respects anastomoses, which are as rare on one side as
they are frequent on the other.


IV. _Termination of the Veins._

The veins terminate by two principal trunks, the superior and inferior
venæ cavæ. There is also another, viz. the coronary vein, which empties
separately into the right auricle; but as this trunk only brings back
the blood that went to the heart, we shall pay but little attention
to it in our general remarks, and but little to those small venous
branches that empty separately from it into the same auricle.

Some authors have thought, that the two venæ cavæ were continuous
and formed but one vessel; but it is easy to see how different their
direction is. It is particularly in the fœtus, that their separation
can be well perceived, since one corresponds with the right auricle,
and the other with the left. There is behind the right auricle a kind
of continuity of the membrane between the one and the other; it is the
membrane of the black blood that is common to them, and which passes
from the inferior to the superior; but in this respect there is no more
continuity between them, than between the right side of the heart and
the pulmonary artery, between the left and the aorta, &c.

By considering the whole of the trunks and the branches as a cone, we
can say that there are two great venous cones distinct from each other;
one for all the parts which are above the diaphragm, the other for all
those that are below it.

The superior vena cava does not answer, then, entirely to the union
of the arteries that form the aorta of the same name, which is only
destined to the neck, head, and superior extremities, whilst the
other belongs moreover to the chest by the vena azygos. For a contrary
reason, the descending aorta has a destination much more extended than
the inferior vena cava.

The limit between the two cones of the ascending and descending venæ
cavæ, is placed at the diaphragm. It is especially in this respect that
we can say that this muscle divides the body into two parts. Has not
this arrangement some influence upon the difference that is observed in
certain diseases between the superior and inferior parts? Should not
this cause be connected with those pointed out under the article upon
the fœtus? As yet there is nothing certain with regard to this, but I
think it not improbable.

Though forming each a distinct cone, the two venæ cavæ communicate,
however, especially in the neighbourhood of their common limit, that is
to say, in the neighbourhood of the diaphragm; the azygos is the great
means of communication. We know, in fact, that its trunk opens into
the right renal, into the vena cava itself, or into some of the lumbar
veins, and that the semi-azygos that arises from it, goes also to the
left renal or to the lumbar of the same side. This anastomosis is very
important; physicians have not paid sufficient attention to it. It
proves that when an obstacle is situated in the trunk of the inferior
vena cava, a great part of the blood of this trunk can flow into the
superior. Much has been said of the compression of this trunk by the
enlargements of the liver, in the production of dropsies. But, 1st, it
is ascertained by the numerous examinations of dead bodies in modern
times, that the production of these diseases belongs to every kind of
organic affection; that the lungs, the heart, the womb, the spleen, &c.
can likewise occasion them in the latter periods of the alteration of
their texture; and that, in this respect, they are but a symptom in the
greatest number of cases, and a symptom wholly disconnected with any
sort of compression. 2d. By supposing that the liver could exert upon
the vena cava an analogous compression, in the place where this vein
crosses its posterior part, it is evident that the anastomoses of which
I have just spoken, would prevent the effect of this compression, at
least in great measure.

By supposing that an obstacle was encountered in the vena cava
superior, the same anastomoses would undoubtedly answer the same end;
but as the azygos is inserted very near the auricle, as the course of
the trunk of the vena cava superior is consequently very short, it is
evident that it is especially to counteract the obstacles the inferior
may experience, that these anastomoses have been established.

When the blood of this vein passes thus into the superior, it goes
through certain branches in a direction opposite to that which is
natural to them. For example, suppose that the anastomosis takes place
in the renal, which most often happens; then the blood of the trunk
of the vena cava enters by one extremity of this vein; that from
the kidney comes by the opposite extremity, and both pass into the
azygos. A similar motion evidently supposes the absence of valves in
the renal, from the vena cava to the insertion of the azygos. Now the
renal veins never in fact have these folds; the capsular, the adipose
of the kidney, all the lumbar, are also destitute of them, as Haller
has seen, and I have ascertained it to be uniformly so. This absence of
valves at the places of the anastomoses of the azygos, is a remarkable
phenomenon; it proves very well the use that I attribute to the
communication of the two venæ cavæ by means of this.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


I. _Texture peculiar to this organization._

This organization is nearly the same for the whole system, in the
common membrane that forms the great canal in which the black blood is
contained; but it differs in the textures that are connected exteriorly
with this membrane. In the heart the texture is fleshy; it is analogous
to the texture of the divisions of the aorta, in the pulmonary artery;
it has a peculiar character in the veins; it is this that will now
particularly engage our attention.


_Membrane peculiar to the veins._

In order to see this membrane, it is necessary to remove, 1st, the
loose cellular texture that unites the veins to the neighbouring parts;
2d, the cellular layer of a peculiar nature that immediately covers
them, and of which we have spoken in the article upon the cellular
system. Then we distinguish in the great trunks, longitudinal fibres
all parallel to each other, forming a very fine layer, often difficult
to be seen at first view, but always having a real existence. When the
veins are much dilated, these fibres being more separated, are less
evident than in a state of contraction. These longitudinal fibres are
seen more clearly in the trunk of the inferior vena cava than in that
of the superior. In general it may be said, that they are also more
marked in all the divisions of the first than in those of the second;
dissection has convinced me of this. Undoubtedly this arises from the
greater facility that the blood experiences in circulating in the
second than in the first of these veins, in which it mounts against
its own weight; this is moreover a proof that man was designed to go
erect.

I have uniformly made another remark, it is, that in the superficial
veins these fibres are much more evident than in the deep-seated ones;
the internal saphena is a remarkable example of this. It suffices to
open it in its course, to see very distinctly its fibres through the
common membrane, especially if it is a little contracted. By cutting
the crural vein to compare it with this, it is easy to perceive the
difference, which arises without doubt from this circumstance, that the
neighbouring parts assist the circulation in the deep veins, whilst
there is less of this assistance given to the superficial ones.

The branches have fibres in proportion greater than the trunks; hence
the proportional excess of the thickness of their parietes, their
greater resistance to the blood, their less frequent dilatation, &c.

At the place where any branch arises from a trunk, we observe that the
fibres change their direction and go upon the branch, a circumstance
that distinguishes them from arterial branches, whose fibres are not a
continuation of those of the trunk.

Venous fibres oftentimes approach each other, are united, and give
a greater thickness to the vein; this is frequently observed at the
origin of the saphena. I have also seen this arrangement in the
hypogastric vein; Boyer has likewise noticed it.

In general, the venous fibre, except in these places, is remarkable
for its delicacy, for the little thickness that it consequently gives
to the membrane that it forms. The peculiar membrane of the arteries
infinitely exceeds that of the veins in this respect; it is this
delicacy that favours to a great degree venous extensibility. Observe
that the structure of each kind of vessels is adapted to their peculiar
circulation. If the blood circulated in the veins with parietes like
those of the arteries, its motion would be continually disturbed. A
thousand causes retard the venous blood; when its motion is languid,
the capacity of the vessels is increased; now, the arterial textures
not allowing of this dilatation, it is evident that the circulation
would be interrupted. If then the agent of impulse, placed at the
commencement of the arteries, requires a firm and unyielding texture,
the slow motion of the blood in the veins, the frequent causes that
retard its progress, demand a texture of an opposite character.

What is the nature of the venous fibre? Its appearance, its want of
elasticity and brittleness, its great extensibility of texture, its
softness, its colour, its direction, distinguish it completely from the
arterial fibre. Is it muscular? it does not appear to be irritable,
and it does not look like the muscular fibres. I believe that it is of
a peculiar nature, essentially different from that of all the other
textures, having its peculiar properties, life and organization; I do
not think it capable of much motion. We have, however, but few data
upon this point.

The venous fibre, though infinitely more extensible than the arterial,
is also more resisting; it will support without breaking, very
considerable weight. The experiments of Wintringam have proved this. In
the superficial and inferior veins especially, this is very remarkable.

There is a great difference in individuals as it respects the venous
fibres. In some they are very apparent; in others, they are hardly
distinguishable upon the great trunks; but then they are always very
evident in the branches, particularly in the superficial ones.

There are places in the venous apparatus where we cannot discover
either external fibres, or external cellular texture; this is the
case with the cerebral sinuses, which have the following arrangement.
The jugular vein at its sinus, loses its peculiar texture, and keeps
only the common membrane, which, entering the lateral sinus, lines
it, and extends below into the inferior longitudinal sinus, and
above into the superior; in a word, into all the sinuses of the dura
mater. Hence every sinus supposes, 1st, a separation of the layers
of the dura mater; 2d, the common membrane of the black blood lining
this separation. It is not then upon the dura mater that the blood
circulates; it is upon the same membrane that it flows elsewhere; it
is easy to establish this fact in the superior longitudinal sinus.
This sinus is triangular when considered in relation to the separation
of the layers of the dura mater; but in opening it, we see clearly,
that the common membrane, by passing over its angles, makes it round;
this is very evident. It is easy, also, in many other sinuses, to
separate in certain places this membrane from the dura mater; but
in the greatest number the adhesion is close, like the union of the
arachnoides with the internal surface of the dura mater. This common
membrane of the black blood is spread over the folds of the superior
longitudinal sinus; it forms a singular net-work, which I shall
describe in the cavernous sinuses.

From this general outline, it is evident that the coats of the dura
mater supply in the sinuses the place of the venous fibres and their
external dense cellular texture; the common membrane is always the
same; but the texture that is added to it externally is different.
At the place where each cerebral vein opens into a sinus, the common
membrane of that sinus connects itself with it in its passage and lines
it to its extremities. I know of no author who has thus considered the
cerebral sinuses, as having the common membrane of the black blood
extended into all the separations of the dura mater. How little soever
we examine the internal surface of a sinus, it is easy to see that
this surface differs as much from the texture of the dura mater, as it
resembles the internal surface of the veins.

The cerebral veins, of which the sinuses are the terminations, are
analogous to the arteries of that part in the extreme tenuity of their
parietes, a tenuity that appears to be owing to the absence of the
cellular coat, and which is so great, that you might believe that there
was only a common membrane.

There are no circular fibres in the veins.


_Common Membrane of the Black Blood._

This membrane generally extended from the general capillary system to
the pulmonary, is every where nearly of the same nature. It differs
essentially from that of the red blood in a great number of respects.

1st. It admits of much greater distension; consequently it is less
brittle. Tie a vein, and it will not break, unless the constriction
be excessive; it is almost as pliable as the cellular coat. This
pliability renders it much easier of dissection than the common
membrane of the arteries. 2d. It appears to be much more delicate; we
have a proof of this in the valves, which at first view are hardly
visible from their extreme tenuity, when they are lying against the
external surface of the vein. 3d. This common membrane is never
ossified in old age, like that of the arteries; its organization
seems to resist the deposition of phosphate of lime. When it does
take place, it is an unnatural state; whereas the ossification of the
common membrane of the red blood is almost a natural state in old age,
as I have before observed. This difference between the two common
membranes of the black and red blood, gives a distinctive character to
the diseases of the heart. We never see ossification in the tricuspid
valves, or in the semilunar valves of the pulmonary artery, whilst
they are so frequent on the left side; this is the uniform result
of observations made at the Charity; in the bodies of old people
dissection has always shown me the same thing. So the pulmonary artery,
though analogous to the aorta by its peculiar membrane, is never the
seat of these ossifications, because the common membrane differs
essentially from its own. This single phenomenon, so striking in both
these membranes, would incontestibly prove their organic differences,
while it establishes the necessity of considering them in a general
manner, whether, in the black blood, they line the veins, the pulmonary
artery, and the right side of the heart, or in the red blood, they are
spread upon the arteries, the left side of the heart, and the pulmonary
veins.


_Of the Valves of the Veins._

The common membrane of the black blood has numerous folds that are
called valves. These folds are wanting in the pulmonary artery, except
at its origin, where we find the semilunar valves; in the heart, the
tricuspid valves are in part formed by this membrane; but the venous
valves are wholly made by it; it is with them that we are particularly
concerned.

The form of these valves is parabolical; their convex edge is
attached, and most remote from the heart; their straight edge is
loose, and nearest that organ. There is between them and the vein a
space analogous to that of the semilunar valves of the aorta and the
pulmonary artery. They have not, like these valves, a granulation upon
their loose edge. On a level with the attached edge, the venous texture
is firmer; there is a kind of hardening, which makes a prominent line
of the same curved form as that edge. This hardening supports the
valves, like the one corresponding to it in the semilunar valves. It
appears to be of the same nature as the venous texture, the direction
of whose fibres are changed to form it. When the common membrane
arrives at this prominent line, it is folded to form the valve; so that
it seems to be made of two layers, which are separated with difficulty,
from its extreme tenuity.

The venous valves exist in the inferior vena cava, as in the superior.
In the first, the divisions of the hypogastric, of the crural, tibial,
internal and external saphena veins, &c. are full of them. The second
presents many of them in the external jugular, in the azygos, in the
facial veins, in the veins of the arms, &c. Many veins have no valves,
as we see in the trunk of the inferior vena cava, in the emulgents, in
the cerebral sinuses, &c.

The size of the valves is always in proportion to that of the trunks
in which they are found; very distinct in the azygos, less so in
the saphena, and still less so in the plantar veins. If we compare
them with the caliber of the trunk they occupy, we shall see that
sometimes they can entirely obliterate its cavity, and that at others
they are too narrow to produce this effect. All authors have noticed
this arrangement; they have thought that it depended upon primitive
organization; but I am convinced that it arises wholly from the state
of dilatation or contraction of the veins. In the first state, the
valves being drawn and not dilating in proportion, become smaller
compared to the caliber of the veins, whose cavity they cannot entirely
obliterate when they fall down. In the second state, as they do not
contract in proportion to the vessel, they become more lax and are
capable of closing it completely. All that has been written by authors
upon the size of the valves, depends then wholly upon the state of the
veins at the moment of death. This is so true that they appear large if
the animal dies of hemorrhage, and small if he dies of asphyxia. I have
twice proved this fact.

From what has just been said, it is evident that the reflux of black
blood takes place much easier and extends much further when the vein
is dilated; and that consequently the first pulsation, the effect of
this reflux, does not extend as far as the second, nor this as far as
the third and so on. It is this that happens in the cases that we have
spoken of before. The reflux never extends to the capillary system,
especially in parts at a distance from the heart, because there being
many valves and each checking in a degree the blood, it soon stops by
losing all the motion received from the heart.

The existence of valves is generally constant, but their situation and
number are very variable. Sometimes they are very near each other, at
others at a greater distance, in this respect there is a great variety.
Generally in the small trunks they are nearer, and at a greater
distance in the large ones.

They are rarely arranged three by three, most often in pairs, and
sometimes they are insulated; this is the case especially in the small
vessels, in those of the foot, of the hand, &c. We find in the works of
Haller very minute descriptions of the general arrangement, form and
position of the vascular folds of which we are treating.

These folds perform, as we shall see, an important part in the venous
circulation; by them we are enabled in most operations, to dispense
with tying the venous trunks, if they are not very considerable. In
fact, without them, the blood poured by the collateral branches into
the open vessel, would easily escape by a retrograde motion, and then
we might fear the effusion of all that, which passes in the whole
course of this vessel, whilst now none can escape except what flows
between the opening and the first or second valve.

The valves constitute an essential difference between the veins and
the arteries. Let me observe, that the want of them in these last
vessels is a proof in addition to what has been already named, of
the absence of vital contractility in their texture. In fact if they
contracted like the heart to drive the blood, this fluid, tending as
much to return towards the heart by the effect of this contraction, as
to go to the extremities, there would be at intervals in the arterial
tubes, valves to counteract this first motion; now we only see them
at the origin of the aorta; why? because it is only necessary in the
arteries to resist the effect of the contractility of texture, which,
exerting itself without a jerk, by a mere contraction, can return but
very little blood to the heart. A single obstacle at the beginning of
the arterial system, is sufficient then to prevent the derangement
of the circulation, which might be the effect of the reflux caused
during the systole by the contractility of texture of the arteries,
a reflux which only takes place in certain cases; for ordinarily the
return of the arteries upon themselves, is produced as I have said, by
their containing less blood, which has been driven through them during
the diastole. In order that this reflux might take place, it would be
necessary that the effect of the contractility of texture should in the
systole exceed what the arteries have lost of blood in the diastole.


_Action of re-agents upon the Venous Texture._

This texture exposed to drying, becomes yellowish, remains pliable and
can be bent in any direction; so that the dried venous bands, might in
this respect, be applied to uses, to which the arterial could not in
the same state.

This texture becomes putrid also more easily than the arterial, but
less so than the others, particularly the muscular. To ascertain
this, I have exposed at the same time, venous trunks and portions of
intestines of fine muscular layers, to the contact of a moist air.

It resists maceration less than the arterial texture, but more than the
others; water in which it has been macerated by itself is much less
fetid than that in which an equal portion of muscular texture has been
placed.

The horny hardening of the venous fibres is very evident when they are
plunged into boiling water or the concentrated acids. They contract
then more than half, at the same time they become more evident; in
this way they can be studied better; I have used it often; their
contraction thickens the parietes of the vein. When they are hardened
in this way, if they remain in boiling water or the acids, they become
soft very soon in the second, more slowly in the first. Boiling acts
upon them quicker than upon the arterial fibres; they can also be
reduced by long ebullition to a pulpy state, to which we can never
bring the arteries.

The caustic alkali seems to have a very remarkable action upon the
veins. After remaining a short time in a solution of this alkali, they
become diaphanous, diminish in size, do not entirely dissolve, it is
true and become liquid, as in the acids, but evidently lose their
elementary principles, give a remarkable precipitate, and always render
the liquor less strong, by the new combinations which it forms.


II. _Parts common to the organization of the Vascular System with Black
Blood._


_Blood Vessels._

The veins have in their texture little arteries and veins, which take
very much the same course as in the arteries. They ramify at first in
the cellular membrane, send small branches to the neighbouring parts,
then penetrating the venous fibres, wind there in a thousand different
directions and finally terminate about the common membrane, which when
injected has appeared to me to receive more than in the arteries.


_Cellular Texture._

The veins, like the arteries, have around them two kinds of cellular
texture; one which is exterior and of the same kind as that which is
found in the interstices of all the organs; it contains fat and serum,
and serves only to connect the veins with the adjacent organs; the
other dense and compact, forms for them a proper coat. No author has
yet distinguished the cellular system of this particular texture from
that which is generally spread over the organs, though it differs from
it so essentially in its filamentary texture, in its dryness, its
uniform want of fat and serum, its remarkable power of resistance, &c.
When we raise it, by tearing it with the fingers from the veins, it
appears as if it was formed of an infinite number of little filaments
interwoven with each other.

After having formed this external covering to the veins, this cellular
texture of a peculiar nature analogous to the sub-arterial, sub-mucous,
&c. passes between the longitudinal venous fibres, separates them,
forms for them a kind of sheath, and terminates in the common membrane,
which appears to contain it in its texture, and which owes perhaps in
part to this circumstance, the great extensibility that it possesses.

I would observe that the presence of the cellular texture in the venous
parietes is a distinctive and striking character that distinguishes
them from those of the arteries, with which their texture has in other
respects no kind of analogy.


_Exhalants and Absorbents._

It appears that there is no exhalation upon the internal surface of
the veins. This surface is always moist in the dead body, though the
vessels are empty; but I attribute this phenomenon, as in the arteries,
to a transudation that has taken place after death. If there was in
fact a fluid exhaled, it would prevent the adhesions of the venous
parietes, when during life the blood ceases to flow through them. Now
every vein that is empty is obliterated into a sort of ligament, like
the arteries in similar cases.

There is no more absorption upon the internal surface of the veins,
than exhalation. To satisfy myself of this fact, I have tried upon
the external and internal jugular veins, the same experiment before
noticed, as having been made upon the carotid artery; I obtained the
same result and drew from it the same conclusion. I have been induced
to make these experiments, from the opinion of many distinguished
anatomists, who thought that the absorbents arose immediately from the
veins and the arteries. It is possible that this is the case in the
smaller branches, in the capillary system especially, as I shall say in
the absorbent system; but I do not believe that any thing similar can
be demonstrated in the trunks.

It appears then that the exhalants and absorbents of the venous
parietes, like those of the arterial, are confined to the nutritive
functions, and that they are consequently few. This remark is
applicable not only to the veins, but to the whole of the vascular
system with black blood.


_Nerves._

1st. The veins differ essentially from the arteries by the few nerves
of the ganglions that accompany them. Whilst these nerves form for most
of the arteries a kind of covering, they are scarcely spread at all
upon the veins. By laying bare the venæ cavæ, jugulars and azygos, it
is easy to observe this. 2d. The side of the heart with black blood,
receives as many nerves as that with red; this proves that they have no
influence upon the contraction, as it is evidently weaker on the right
side than the left; whereas if it was produced by the nerves it would
be equal, as there is an equal distribution of them. 3d. The pulmonary
artery has but very few nerves. I know not as yet the relation that
exists between it and the pulmonary veins in this respect.

It appears from this general survey, that the system with red blood has
many more nerves than that with black. In fact being nearly equal at
the heart, and the difference being very sensible in this particular
between the aortic arteries and the veins that go to the right
auricle, although the pulmonary artery may have a few more than the
corresponding veins, which I think very probable, yet the short course
of these vessels would not prevent the disproportion from being very
apparent.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.

The veins are in general but little elastic, soft, and loose; they
partake of the character of many of the animal textures, and are
essentially distinguished in this respect from the arteries, which
as we have seen are very elastic. We shall now treat of the vital
properties and the properties of texture in these vessels.


I. _Properties of Texture. Extensibility._

The veins have in regard to this property, an arrangement entirely
opposite to that of the arteries, which are very extensible
longitudinally, but very little so transversely.

The veins stretch but little in the first direction. When drawn out
of a stump after amputation upon the dead body, they lengthen but
little in proportion to what they dilate in varices, though here they
experience an actual increase of size. Perhaps however this depends
less upon the deficiency of extensibility of texture, than upon the
circumstance that the folds are less evident than in the arteries, and
of course the development is less. Whatever may be the cause, the fact
is certain and uniform.

Few organs, on the other hand, exhibit a greater degree of
extensibility transversely, than the veins. In the dead body, they can
be enormously dilated, by injections of air, water, fatty substances,
&c. In the living, we know the varicose dilatations, which arise in the
great trunks, from the obstacles to the course of the blood in the
lungs. While the arteries do not appear very often more than to double
their diameter without breaking their common and peculiar membrane, the
veins treble, quadruple, and even quintuple their diameter without this
rupture's taking place.

We have however numerous examples of this accident. Haller has related
many in his great work. We see these ruptures take place during
pregnancy in the veins of the lower extremities; there are examples of
them also in the external veins of the head in violent headaches. We
have seen the venæ cavæ, the jugulars, the subclavians suddenly break
and produce death. Every one knows of the hemorrhages that arise from
the rupture of the hemorrhoidal veins, &c. I think that the extreme
tenuity of the parietes of the cerebral veins exposes them to being
frequently torn by blows upon the head, wounds upon that part, &c. When
there is an effusion in the tunica arachnoides, it can certainly come
from no other source than the venous trunks, which being surrounded
by a fold of the arachnoides, pass through this cavity to go to the
cerebral sinuses. Now we know that this case is very common, and
that it even takes place at the same time with that, in which the
dura mater being detached from the cranium, is found separated by an
effusion. Is not apoplexy a sudden rupture of the venous extremities?
I have already observed that we have no data upon this point. All
these cases are very different from arterial aneurism; they often take
place when the dilatation is infinitely less than in many instances
where the veins remain whole. Very commonly this does not happen. The
whole of the vein, with the cellular tunic containing it, bursts. The
arterial rupture in true aneurisms, is on the contrary uniform; when
the dilatation is carried to a certain point it always happens. The
two arterial coats break easily, the cellular remains whole. I do not
believe that there is a solitary instance of a great aneurism, without
rupture. Why? because the arterial extensibility can only yield to
a certain point. The ruptures take place then from a want of this
property; they are disconnected with this cause in the veins. We do not
know yet how they are produced. In a great number of cases certainly,
there is an affection of the venous texture; this is undoubtedly the
case in hemorrhoids, &c. Let us be content to point out the differences
between arterial and venous ruptures, and wait till further observation
shall discover to us all their causes.

If we bear in mind, that the arterial fibres are very numerous and
all circular, that the venous, on the contrary, are on the one hand
longitudinal where they exist, and on the other that they are very
thinly scattered on their vessels, we shall then see why the first
resist much longer a distension in the direction of their diameter
than of their axis, and why the opposite phenomenon is observed in the
second, though much less decided.


_Contractility._

This corresponds with the extensibility. Slight in the longitudinal
direction, much greater in the transverse. 1st. It produces the
contraction upon themselves, of the parietes of the umbilical vein,
of any trunk that is tied, &c. 2d. It produces in a trunk that is
pricked, the sudden evacuation of the blood contained between the
two ligatures by the return of the parietes upon themselves. 3d. It
manifests a decided influence on the flow of blood in venesection. 4th.
The numberless varieties of caliber that the veins exhibit after death,
according to the quantity of blood they contain, are the result of
their extensibility and contractility of texture. 5th. During life, the
superficial veins appear very various; dilated in summer, contracted in
winter, expanded in the warm bath, as we see the saphenas, especially
in pediluvium, lessened in the cold bath, prominent by a long
continued perpendicular position, flattened by a horizontal one, &c.
they present to him who observes them, at different times, numerous
varieties. I very much doubt whether those who have calculated so much
the capacity of the vessels, the velocity of the blood, &c. would have
undertaken their labours, if they had opened many bodies, or made many
experiments upon living animals; now all the varieties depend upon the
extensibility and contractility of texture.


II. _Vital Properties._


_Properties of Animal Life._

Have the veins sensibility? The following is the result of my
experiments upon the subject. 1st. Irritated externally by any
mechanical instrument, pain is not produced, as Haller has seen; 2d, a
ligature put upon them gives no pain, whether it is done upon living
animals, or in certain surgical operations, in great amputations, for
example, in which it is recommended to tie the vein as well as the
artery. 3d. Irritated internally, they exhibit the same phenomenon. I
have many times pushed a stilet very far into one of these vessels,
without making the animal cry out. I would observe also, that this
is a good method of examining the sensibility of the heart, without
producing in the chest a disturbance, that would increase, diminish,
or alter this property in any manner, by the general derangement that
it would occasion in the economy. I force then a long stilet into the
right external jugular vein, opened as it is in the operation for
bleeding. This stilet goes to the heart, without any accident, by
straightening out the venous angles. The animal oftentimes gives no
sign of pain; sometimes, however, he does; the motion of the pulse is
always accelerated. We might easily reach in a man, without accident,
with a stilet, the right side of the heart, by introducing it into the
right external jugular vein. Why, in certain asphyxias, in syncopes
which resist all other stimulants, &c. might we not employ this method
to re-animate the action of the heart? 4th. When we inject a foreign
fluid into the veins, however irritating it may be, the animals rarely
show any sign of pain. Urine, bile, wine, the narcotics, &c. are
transfused with impunity in this respect. 5th. On the contrary, when
a bubble of air enters them, the animal cries out, is agitated, and
struggles before dying; is this owing to the contact of the fluid upon
the common membrane? I believe not; for usually there is an interval
between the cries and the injection of the air. It is possible that
the pain happens at the instant when the air strikes the brain, after
having passed through the lungs, a passage which is constant, as I have
observed elsewhere.

There is evidently no animal contractility in the veins. The same
experiments that demonstrate its absence in the arteries, prove it also
as it respects the veins. I have made them at the same time upon both
kinds of vessels. I refer, then, upon this subject to the preceding
system.


_Properties of Organic Life. Sensible Contractility._

This property does not appear to be an attribute of the veins. Haller,
by irritating them in different ways, perceived no sensible motion in
them. I have usually made the same observation, whether I employed
internal or external irritation.

It has appeared to me, however, in two or three cases, that a manifest
contraction took place. As the venous fibres are only longitudinal, and
as they are very few, it is evident that in admitting that they are
muscular, it would be very difficult to observe the effect of irritants
applied to them, though it might be real. The question is not, then,
fully settled, though I incline much more to the belief that there is
no venous irritability. As the venæ cavæ have evident fleshy fibres
at their origin, it is evident that they possess at that place the
contractility of which we are treating.

A proof of the great obscurity of the sensible organic contractility
in the veins, is, that it is never increased in disease. All the
organs, in which this property exists, are remarkable for its frequent
increase, which constitutes in the heart the quickness and the force
of the pulse, in the stomach vomiting, in the intestines diarrhœa, in
the bladder incontinence of urine, especially in children, &c. Now the
veins never exhibit a derangement, which, corresponding to these, would
make us believe in the existence of a power of which this derangement
is the excess, if I may so say.

Observe, that this observation is also applicable to the arteries;
never in a determinate portion of the arterial system, do we see this
local disturbance, this insulated derangement, which certain portions
of the intestinal canal sometimes exhibit. The irregularity of the
motion of the blood is always general, because it arises from a single
cause, viz. the irregular impulse of the heart.

Observe, that this way of discovering the presence or absence of this
or that vital force in a part, by the affections which increase that
force there, deserves an important consideration in the examination
of these forces. Authors have not employed this method of discovering
them, of pronouncing consequently upon their presence or absence in the
organs.


_Of the Venous Pulse._

The pulsation that the veins have under certain circumstances, must not
be taken for an effect of the venous irritability. It is an effect of
the reflux of the blood, which not being able to go through the lungs,
stagnates in the pulmonary arteries and in the right side of the heart;
so that when this contracts, as the blood finds an obstacle in the
ordinary course, it flows back whence it came, as when the aliments
are unable to pass down, they take the other direction. This reflux
takes place, to a certain distance, notwithstanding the valves; it is
often very evident in the jugular vein, when animals, submitted to
experiments, breathe laboriously; then it is discontinued; it takes
place three or four times, then ceases, and returns irregularly; it
is observed also in the last moments of life, when the lungs are
embarrassed.

The vein is then sensibly dilated; then it contracts. But if you
apply the finger above, you do not experience a sensation analogous
to that of the pulse; you will perceive only a wave of blood which
flows back. The reason of it is plain; 1st, there is no locomotion;
2d, as the venous parietes are loose, they could not strike the finger
sufficiently strong, if there was a similar change of place. Observe,
that it is less the blood than the artery itself which by its firm
texture gives the sensation of the pulse; if it could straighten itself
when empty, as it does when it is full, it would produce nearly the
same sensation; this is a remark that should be added to what I have
said upon the pulse in the preceding system.

The contraction of the veins in the motion of the reflux, of which we
are treating, is only the contractility of texture. When the heart
ceases to propel the blood in its cavity, it contracts, after having
been dilated; it is nearly the same in the dead body, in which we fix
a syringe in the veins; when they are very full of water, if we draw
back the piston a little, immediately the fluid returning, the vein
contracts; it is as when it contracts from a puncture that evacuates
the blood; this does not imply any irritability.

I believe that sometimes this reflux may depend upon an irregular
motion of the heart, which contracts in an opposite direction to the
ordinary one, though there is no obstacle in the lungs. What induces
me to think so, is, that frequently in experiments, at the moment the
animal begins to suffer much, the reflux takes place before the lungs
have had time to be disturbed. A very remarkable thing in experiments
is the quickness with which pain disturbs the motion of the heart,
accelerates it, renders it irregular, &c. We can always at will hasten
respiration, by making the animal suffer; now the acceleration of the
pulse is always prior to that of respiration, which appears to be
determined by it. I am persuaded that if the diseases of the heart were
as frequent on the right side as the left, they would often produce
this reflux and this pulsation of the veins.

The limits of the reflux of the venous blood vary. Haller has observed
it as far as the iliacs. In general, it rarely goes beyond the great
trunks, on account of the valves. I have demonstrated in my Researches
upon Death, that the colour of those who die of asphyxia, of those who
are drowned, &c. does not depend on this, because it cannot evidently
extend to the capillary system, which receives the black blood that
colours it, from the arteries that then circulate that kind of blood.

The reflux of the black blood in the veins, produced in the preceding
cases, either by an obstruction in the lungs, or by a sudden
derangement in the action of the heart, takes place in a natural
state, though in an infinitely less degree. In fact, when the right
auricle contracts, all the blood does not pass into the corresponding
ventricle; the veins being open, a portion flows back into them. It
is difficult to determine the extent of this natural reflux, of which
all authors have spoken. When the thorax is opened, we observe it
distinctly; we might then ascertain its extent; but in this case,
respiration not being performed as usual, it is evident that we cannot
judge by it of what ordinarily takes place.


_Insensible Contractility._

This property, which, like the preceding, is inseparable from the
organic sensibility, exists in the veins as in the other parts; it
presides only over nutrition; it appears more evident than in the
arteries; at least the diseases which particularly increase it are more
frequent in the veins. The texture of these vessels is often inflamed.
1st. Bell relates cases of it, the effect of external violence. 2d.
Every one is acquainted with the inflammation of the hemorrhoids. 3d.
The cicatrization of venous wounds after bleeding is a product of
inflammation. Without doubt this cicatrization is promoted by the want
of impulse, to which the arteries are subjected; but certainly these
last would not in like circumstances heal so fast, if they did at
all. When an artery has been tied, it is necessary that its parietes,
inflamed by the action of the thread, most often cut by it, and brought
into contact, should form adhesions, that the cure may be complete, and
the ligature come off without danger. Now, nothing is more difficult
and slower than their adhesion, from the difficulty with which the
arterial texture inflames. Hence the frequency of hemorrhage after the
operation for aneurism and other great operations. The blood often
bursts out at the end of twenty, thirty, or forty days; the surgeon
should always be upon his guard when he has tied these great trunks,
from the want of disposition in the arterial texture to inflame.
Frequently when the artery is obliterated, it is not by inflammation.
Whilst the ligature stops the blood, the portion of artery comprised
between it and the first collateral branch, closes gradually by the
contractility of texture, and forms a kind of ligament, which arrests
the blood after the thread has fallen off. I do not know but that
these cases are more numerous than those of inflammation. Now the
veins always adhere soon when they are tied; their wounds cicatrize
immediately. In great wounds it is almost always useless to tie them at
the first moment, on account of the valves, as I have said above, and
afterwards, because the cut ends contract, and soon inflame and adhere.
If there are venous hemorrhages, it is at the time of the injury, and
not as long after as in the arteries.

Every thing proves, then, that the vital activity is much greater in
the venous than in the arterial system, in respect to the tonic powers.
The absence of the cellular texture in the second and its presence in
the first, may have an influence upon this phenomenon.


_Observations on the motion of the Black Blood in the Veins._

From what has just been said, it appears, that the blood is beyond the
influence of the heart when it arrives in the veins. It is evident,
then, that the veins can have no pulse. 1st. This phenomenon depends
upon a single impulse, suddenly received by the contraction of the left
ventricle; now, the blood is poured from all parts by the capillary
system into the veins, this agent of impulse is wanting; the cause of
the pulse does not exist in the veins. 2d. The necessary conditions for
its production in the texture of the vessels in which it takes place,
are elasticity and resistance, which are also wanting in the veins.
They are only susceptible, then, either of a pulsation which occasions
the reflux of the blood in the derangement of the lungs, or in the
irregular motions of the heart, or of an undulation of which they are
the seat, when arterial blood accidentally circulates in them; now, in
either, the heart is the principle of motion, and it could not exist
without it.

This is what takes place in the venous motion. The capillary system, by
its insensible contractility, pours continually into the venous system
a certain quantity of blood. This fluid, added to what is already
there, communicates a general motion to it. Now, as the whole venous
system is constantly full, it is necessary that while the fluid enters
at one side it should go out at the other; if not, the venous parietes
would dilate; but, as they have a resistance by which they can act to a
certain point upon the blood, this fluid not being able to dilate the
veins, flows towards the heart.

The impulse given by the insensible contraction of the capillary
system, is too weak, however, to extend instantaneously from one
extremity of the veins to the other, especially where the blood rises
against its weight. As this fluid enters these vessels, the weight
of that which is before it not being overcome, it would produce a
general dilatation, and the blood would not reach the heart; but the
valves counteract this, by supporting at short distances the column of
blood. Weakness of the venous parietes and the existence of valves are
necessarily connected. If the veins were as strong as the arteries,
unable to dilate when the blood enters them, they would necessarily
transmit the surplus to the heart, if they were destitute of valves;
but on the other hand, their circulation would be every instant
embarrassed.

It appears that it is not only the insensible contraction of the
capillary system which propels the blood in the veins; but that the
ramifications of these vessels have a kind of absorbent power, by which
they draw blood into this system. Now the insensible motion produced
by this power tends evidently from the ramifications towards the
trunks, as in the lymphatics; then, when, on the one hand, the blood
is propelled in the veins, and, on the other, as it were, attracted by
them, it is evident that the primitive source of motion that it obeys,
is in the capillary system.

This impulse communicated to the blood, exceeds but very little
the resistance which this fluid experiences in its motion; so that
the least resistance deranges this motion. Hence, as we have seen,
the necessity of anastomoses. Hence also the necessity of other
assistance to aid this motion, such as, 1st, the muscular action, the
influence of which we cannot doubt, when we see the flow of blood in
venesection accelerated by the motion of the muscles of the fore-arm,
the palpitations of the heart, produced by the blood that flows there
after a rapid circulation; when we observe that varices are as rare
in the veins situated among the muscles, as they are common in the
sub-cutaneous ones, &c.; 2d, the pulsation of those arteries which
are in many places joined to the veins, and which communicate to
them a kind of motion; 3d, the motion of certain parts, like that
of the brain, which continually rising and falling, accelerates the
circulation of the blood of the sinuses in an evident manner; so
also the constant locomotion of the gastric viscera, propels it in
the veins of the abdomen, and that of the pectoral viscera, in those
of the thorax. It is so true that the veins derive assistance to
their circulation from external motions, that if a limb is a long
time immoveably fixed when fractured, these vessels often dilate.
4th. External frictions, if they are not so violent as to embarrass
the venous circulation, evidently facilitate it; this is one of the
advantages of dry frictions. 5th. A slight compress, not sufficient
to check the venous blood, often promotes its circulation, when the
external organs are weakened. We know, since the time of Theden and
Desault, the advantage of tight bandages, for varicose ulcers, even for
varices, &c.

Since the principle of the motion of the venous blood is generally
spread throughout the whole general capillary system, instead of
being concentrated, like that of the arteries, in a single organ, it
is evident, that this motion cannot be uniform, that it must vary
according to the state of the capillary system in the different parts;
that it can be more rapid in some veins, and slower in others. This is
in fact what we see, especially externally where the veins are more
or less swelled, according as the blood circulates there more or less
rapidly. In the arteries on the contrary, the motion is every where the
same; it is a general and sudden shock, an impulse, which, every where
felt at the same time, is necessarily every where uniform; so you never
see some arteries more full, others more empty, as it happens in the
veins.

There are numerous researches to be made on the motion of the blood
in the veins. Notwithstanding all that authors have written upon this
question, there is an obscurity in it in which we perceive but few
rays of light. These difficulties arise from this, that we do not know
precisely what is the kind and form of motion communicated to the blood
in the capillary system, what is the influence of the vascular parietes
upon this fluid, &c. &c. Our knowledge upon this point is reduced to
certain views which I have just presented, and which are particularly
relative to the parallel between the motion of the blood in the veins
and the arteries. I believe that this parallel carried further at some
future day, will throw much light upon the venous circulation; in fact,
as the first motion is much more easily understood than the second,
we must proceed from what is known to what is unknown, and place in
opposition what we are acquainted with in one, with that which we seek
to know in the other. This is the summary of this parallel, though
imperfect; 1st, General pulsation in the arteries, absence of this
general pulsation in the veins. 2d. Rapidity of the course of the blood
in the arteries; slowness of the same course in the veins. 3d. Greater
capacity and thinner parietes in the veins; less capacity and greater
thickness in the parietes of the arteries. 4th. Necessity for accessory
assistance for the venous circulation; the inutility of this assistance
for the arterial circulation. 5th. The blood flowing per saltem, from
the second, the uniform flow from the first. 6th. The susceptibility
of the blood in the veins, to be influenced by its gravity and other
accessory causes; there is some of this influence in the arterial
motion. The following are the phenomena, which, from what we have just
said, evidently depend upon the existence of an agent of impulse at the
origin of the arteries, and of the absence of this agent at that of the
veins.

1st. Constant uniformity of the motion in the arteries; variety
of motion in every part of the venous system; 2d, dilatation and
contraction generally the same in all the arteries of dead bodies;
extreme variety in this respect in the veins of the different parts;
these are the other phenomena which arise from the unity of impulse in
the first, and from the varieties of the principle of the motion of the
blood in the second, &c.

Some authors have insisted much, in explaining the causes of the
difference of the arterial and venous motion, upon this, that in the
arteries the blood is propelled in decreasing vessels, to the capillary
system that resists; in the veins on the contrary it flows in vessels
always increasing till it arrives at the right auricle, which offers
no resistance. But the black abdominal blood is also carried without
the agent of impulse, in a series of decreasing tubes to the capillary
system of the liver, and yet the motion is analogous to that of the
veins.


_Sympathies of the Veins._

The sympathies of the veins are very obscure, like those of the
arteries. As the textures of these two kinds of vessels are rarely
affected, as inflammation and the different kinds of tumours do not
frequently exist in them, and as they are hardly ever the seat of pain,
we know but little of the influence they exert upon the other textures.
However when we transfuse substances into the vessels, we have often
seen acrid and irritating ones upon being introduced into the veins,
produce sudden convulsions in different muscles.

As to the influence that the other organs when affected, exert upon
the veins, we know also but very little. As they are every where
disseminated, like the arteries and the nerves, it is difficult often
to know if it is the vein itself or the organ that it forms, which is
the seat of the sympathetic phenomenon.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

The veins have in the fœtus an arrangement inverse of that of the
arteries; they are in proportion much less developed. It is not in the
great trunks, as in the venæ cavæ, subclavians, iliacs, &c. that we
should compare these vessels, because the reflux of the blood at the
moment of death often dilates these trunks, so as to make us believe
that they are much larger than they really are in a natural state.
It is in the branches and the ramifications that we should make the
comparison; now it is easy to see there, that the veins nearly equal
the arteries, but are not superior to them, as is uniformly the case in
the adult.

However, the side of the heart with black blood, and the pulmonary
artery which make a part of the system with the veins, are
proportionably larger than these. This arises not only from their
receiving and transmitting the blood of these vessels, but also that
of the umbilical vein. It is to this last circumstance that must be
attributed also an anatomical fact always existing in the fœtus, viz.
that the very short trunk of the vena cava, which is extended from the
liver to the heart, is found in proportion much greater than the trunk
of the superior vena cava, which is not the case in after life.

The less development of the venous system, compared with that of the
arteries, appears to arise in the fœtus from this, that much substance
being employed for nutrition which is very rapid in the early periods,
less returns by the veins. This phenomenon however is not peculiar
to the black blood. We shall see that the excretories transmit less
fluids by the glands, and that the exhalants pour out less upon their
respective surfaces. Much blood enters the general capillary system of
the fœtus; hence why the arteries are very large. There remains in the
organs, much of the substances that it contains, to nourish them; but
little goes out of the general capillary system for secretions, and
exhalations; little returns by the veins.

The more the fœtus advances in age, the more of this blood is carried
in the veins. In the early periods, almost all remains in the organs
to form them. Towards the period of birth, these things approximate to
what they will be in the adult.

In this general phenomenon of the venous system in the fœtus, the
proportions are always preserved between the veins of the different
parts, according to the increase of them. It is thus that most of the
superior parts, the brain in particular, being in the fœtus the seat
of a more active nutrition than the inferior, the veins there are also
more developed.

We can hardly distinguish fibres at this age in the venous parietes,
though they no doubt exist. I have only remarked, that they then
contain much fewer small vessels in proportion than the arteries, whose
trunks are covered with them, as it is easy to see upon the aorta.

Though less dilated than afterwards, the veins appear to be as strongly
organized; their parietes are very resisting; they dilate less easily;
this continues during the whole of youth. It is to this that I
attribute the absence of varices at that age. As on the one hand less
blood circulates in the veins, and on the other they appear to be in
proportion more resisting, it is evident that they must yield less.


II. _State of this System during growth and afterwards._

A remarkable revolution takes place at birth, as we have seen, in the
system of black blood. The right auricle and ventricle receive the
whole of the blood, of which a part until then went immediately to the
right side by the foramen ovale. This difference has not much influence
upon the size of the right auricle and ventricle; differences only
in their form take place, which I shall point out in the Descriptive
Anatomy.

During the first years of life, the veins have a real inferiority as
it respects the arteries. This inferiority continues during the whole
time of growth; of this you may be satisfied by examining the external
veins; they are never as evident, or as much developed in children as
in an adult. Compare the arm of a man with that of a child, and the
difference will be perceptible.

The proportion of the cerebral veins over the others, is gradually
lost as we advance in age, because the brain does not continue to
predominate so much in its nutrition.

At the period of puberty, and towards the end of growth in height, the
veins partake of this general plethora, which seems to manifest itself,
and which is, as we have seen, the source of many diseases.

When the growth in length and thickness is completed, the veins begin
to have a larger diameter; they become more prominent externally;
it appears that more blood constantly passes through them. Make the
muscles of an adult man contract strongly, and you will see all the
veins considerably swelled. The same experiment will not produce a
proportional effect upon a young man; ligatures applied show the same
difference.


III. _State of this System in Old Age._

In the last years of life the veins become much developed compared
to what they are in youth; we can say that in this respect, the two
extreme ages exhibit an inverse arrangement. In considering the
external appearance in the two ages, we may be convinced by the
examination of the superficial veins, of the truth of this assertion.

Let us not think, however, that this greater development supposes an
addition of substance in the venous parietes, as for example, the
increased size of the bones depends upon the super-abundance of the
phosphate of lime. It is a simple dilatation of these parietes, which
are weakened, and become more slender, instead of increasing. This
dilatation is owing to the loss of their elasticity and to the greater
quantity of blood they carry. In fact the motion of decomposition
evidently predominates in old age over that of composition. More
substance is taken from the organs than is added to them, at this
period. I know not but that the bones receive a greater quantity of the
substance that nourishes them. In all the other organs, an opposite
phenomenon is evident; hence their horny hardening, their withering,
if I may use the term. Now, as the system with black blood is that in
which is poured all the residue of the decomposition of the organs, it
is not astonishing that it should be dilated in old age; so the system
with red blood, which carries the materials of their composition,
predominates in the first year of life.

The superabundance of black blood in old age however, is to a certain
degree deceptive; it depends in part upon the slowness of the
circulation in the veins, in which the blood, moved with difficulty on
account of the weakness of the capillary system, tends to stagnate,
and dilate them, as I have said before; so that though there would be
less black blood returning from the organs, there would be more in
the veins, than in the adult; the velocity of the circulation then
would be much less. There takes place in the whole system, what exists
in a varix, for example, in which the blood accumulates because its
velocity is diminished. It is not necessary then to believe, that the
superabundance of the black blood in old age, supposes a plethora
like that of the red blood in infancy, in which, on the one hand, the
arteries contain more fluid, and on the other they propel it with
greater velocity. We know from this that the dilatation of the veins
in old age is a further proof of the principles established above;
viz. that the capacity of the veins is always in an inverse ratio to
the velocity of the fluids that go through them. It admits of but
an inaccurate comparison, though it may give an idea of what passes
in the venous system; a river which is very broad above a bridge,
flows slowly; but its bed being much contracted under the arches, its
velocity is much increased; so that the equilibrium may be established.
So in the veins, there is little velocity and much capacity in old age,
and much velocity and but little capacity in infancy.

Anatomists know very well the difference of the arteries and the veins
at the two extreme ages of life; they choose old subjects to study the
veins; on the contrary, these subjects are wholly improper for arterial
injections, which succeed so well, and sometimes too well, in infants,
in whom every thing appears to become vascular, and in whom the
examination of the veins would be very difficult, and even impossible.

The veins of the inferior parts are generally more dilated in old age
than those of the superior; this arises from the habitual weight of
the column of blood, which constantly acting, produces finally a real
effect; for, as we have said, the venous circulation is much influenced
by mechanical causes, owing to the want of power in the cause that
circulates it; hence why varices are infinitely more frequent in the
inferior than the superior parts, in which they are hardly ever found.

In women who have had many children, we see this dilatation of the
veins of the inferior parts in a very evident manner; very often
there are varices in them. Observe that this disease seems to be the
companion of old age more particularly than that of every other age. On
the contrary, we rarely see aneurisms in old people. The rupture of the
veins has been almost constantly observed at this or the adult age. I
hardly know an example of it in infancy.

The pulmonary artery does not dilate in old age in proportion to the
veins; because, removed from the action of foreign bodies, and provided
at its origin with an agent of impulse formed of a firm and resisting
texture, it has not been in the habit of yielding like them.


IV. _Accidental development of the Veins._

The veins are accidentally developed in two ways. 1st. In cancerous
tumours, in fungi, &c. in which more red blood enters, they acquire
a size in proportion to that of the arteries; now, as they are
superficial, we see more easily their increase than that of the
arteries; this increase, which has been taken for a characteristic
of cancers and other analogous tumours, is only a consequence of the
increase of nutrition. The motion of the blood is as rapid there as in
the other veins; there is no obstruction to it. 2d. There are cases on
the other hand, in which the veins dilate, because the blood cannot
easily circulate in them, and because the velocity of its course is
diminished. For example, the whole venous system of the abdominal
parietes is often increased in ascites; it is not because there is more
blood circulated; there is less than in the ordinary state; but it is
because the venous parietes having in part lost their elasticity, like
the neighbouring parts, the circulation becomes slower; now the slower
it is, the more the blood accumulates and the more the venous parietes
are dilated. It is then a kind of general varix in a division of the
veins. There is not more blood brought by the arteries, as in the
preceding case; the same thing in part happens in old age.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

REMARKS UPON THE PULMONARY ARTERY AND VEINS.

Though in the exposition of the two systems of black and red blood,
I have considered the pulmonary artery as making a part with the
veins, and the pulmonary veins as a continuation of the arteries, yet
their nature is wholly different. There are in truth but two general
membranes, forming the two great tubes in which are contained the two
kinds of blood, which are every where of the same nature, from the
capillary system to the pulmonary. The textures added to the exterior
of these two common membranes are essentially different. Thus the
texture of the pulmonary artery, though added to the membrane with
black blood, is, in point of thickness nearly of the same nature as
that of the aorta and its divisions. So the texture of the pulmonary
veins, though united to the membrane with red blood, is the same as
that of the other veins.

This uniformity in texture supposes an uniformity in the functions,
and this is really the case. The mechanical laws of the circulation of
black blood are the same in the pulmonary artery as those of the red
blood in the aorta. So the laws of the general venous circulation are
the same with those of the pulmonary veins; inspection proves this;
and, moreover, it must be so, since the relation of the heart to the
two kinds of vessels, the veins and the arteries, is the same.

Each system of blood, then, has its two modes of circulation. Sudden
motion, generally communicated, and not the progressive undulation of
the fluid; a pulsation by a real locomotion, a general straightening of
all the divisions of the same trunk at each impulse of the heart; these
are the general mechanical characters of the artery with red blood,
as well as that with black. Absence of pulsation, slowness in the
course of the blood, want of straightening, &c.; these are the general
attributes of the veins of each kind of blood.

There are no doubt general modifications that arise from local causes.
Thus, on account of the short course of the pulmonary veins, the weight
has scarcely any influence upon the blood; they never become varicose;
the motion of the fluid is more rapid in them, since they have less
time to lose that which is communicated to the blood in the pulmonary
capillary system, &c.; thus the artery of the same name, whose branches
are less tortuous, does not seem to me to have pulsations as evident
as those of the aorta, &c. But these general phenomena are always the
same; they are but different modifications.

This is why the general arrangement is nearly the same in the veins and
in the arteries, whether they circulate red blood or black. Thus, for
example, each of the two arteries go off from a ventricle by a single
orifice, necessary for the unity of the impulse of the blood, for the
uniformity of its course in the divisions of its great vessels, and
for the simultaneous pulsations in all the divisions. On the contrary,
the veins pour into the heart the red and black blood by many separate
orifices; this is of no consequence, since, as we have seen, the motion
of this fluid in the veins is not uniform, but may be accelerated or
retarded in a part, by the influences it receives; thus, it may pass
with velocity through the opening of the vena cava superior, and slowly
through that of the vena cava inferior, &c.

From the preceding considerations, it seems, that if we have no
regard but to the mechanism of circulation, that it is almost of no
consequence whether we consider with the ancients the small and great
circulation by studying first the course of the blood in the artery
and the pulmonary veins, then in the aorta and the general venous
system; or of studying, as we have done, the course of the blood, first
in the pulmonary veins and the aorta, then in the general veins and
the pulmonary artery. But if we consider this great function in the
important relations of nutrition, secretions, exhalations, for which
they furnish the materials, of the general stimulus it carries to
all parts, and which is indispensable to the support of life, of the
introduction of foreign fluids in the body of the animal, and of the
change of these fluids into its own substance; then I think it must be
described as I have done it.


ARTICLE SIXTH.

ABDOMINAL VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


_Situation, Forms, General Arrangement, Anastomoses, &c._

There is in the abdomen a system of black blood wholly independent
of the preceding, arranged precisely like it, with the difference,
that its course is shorter, and that it has no agent of impulse. This
system, usually known by the name of Vena Porta, is found in most
animals.

It arises from that part of the general capillary system which
belongs to the intestines, the stomach, the omentum, the spleen, the
pancreas, &c. and generally to all the abdominal viscera connected
with digestion. This origin is remarkable. The viscera in the abdomen,
foreign to the phenomena of digestion, are also foreign to the origin
of this system. The kidnies and their dependancies, as the glandulæ
renales, the ureters, the bladder, the urethra, &c. the genital organs,
the diaphragm, &c. the abdominal parietes themselves, &c. &c. pour
their black blood into the preceding system. Why are the digestive
viscera, in their whole extent, different from the others, in the
destination of their black blood? To answer this question, we must know
the uses of the system of which we are treating; now, of these we are
ignorant.

Thus rising from the whole gastric apparatus, this system forms into
two or three trunks, which soon unite into a single one, which occupies
the superior and right part of the abdomen below the liver.

This common trunk soon divides again into many branches, which spread
in the liver into an infinity of ramifications, and are spent upon the
texture of that organ.

This system, then, presents the same general arrangement as the
preceding; it is composed of two trees united by their lopped summits,
that intermix with each other. Place an agent of impulse at these
summits, the arrangement will be the same as in the two preceding. The
blood is moved from one capillary system to another. Divided at first
into small streams, it is formed into masses constantly increasing to a
certain point, then it is divided again, and is carried in streams not
larger than the first.

In the abdominal portion, the ramifications, the small branches, the
branches and the trunks are arranged very nearly as in the general
venous system. The ramifications are found in the organs, the small
branches in their interstices, most of the branches are situated in the
layers of the peritoneum, there accompanying the arteries, and the
trunks wind along the subjacent cellular texture. As to the hepatic
portion, contained wholly in the liver, it is divided there nearly like
the preceding.

The anastomoses present the following arrangement in the system of
which we are treating. 1st. Its hepatic portion appears to want them;
all the branches, smaller branches, and ramifications, go separately.
As the circulation is not subject in the liver to increase or
diminution, the solid texture of this organ protecting the vessels,
the blood has no occasion for the means by which it can deviate from
one place to another. Thus the great divisions of the pulmonary artery
and veins, which go immediately into the lungs where they are wholly
distributed, do not communicate with each other. Thus the branches of
all the arteries and of all the veins contained in the interior of a
viscus, as in the kidney, the spleen, &c. are most commonly without
communication. 2d. As to the abdominal tree, its anastomoses are very
frequent in the smaller branches. We see all along the small intestines
arches exactly like those of the mesenteric arteries; less frequent in
the great intestines, they are, however, very evident in them, as upon
the stomach; in the branches and the trunks they do not exist.

The anastomoses in the system of black abdominal blood are necessary
there from the frequent delays that this fluid may experience. For
observe, that the circulation is performed for the abdominal portion
according to the same laws as in the other veins, and that consequently
that the force that can circulate the blood there, can yield to the
least effort. Now in the different motions of the small intestines,
often too great a fold, the pressure of these organs filled with
aliments upon the veins, when we are lying on the back or the side,
and which pressure the veins support only by their resistance, and a
thousand other causes, impede the course of the blood in one branch,
and force it to flow by anastomoses into others. Observe also, that an
obstacle which is of no consequence to the red blood, on account of the
very strong impetus that is given to it, is very important to the two
circulations of black blood, which receive but a feeble impulse.

The influence of gravity is evident in the blood of this system, as
in that of the preceding. Thus you see the hemorrhoidal veins, more
exposed than all the others to this influence by their position, become
much more frequently varicose; and it is even rare to find dilatations
in the superior mesenteric veins, splenic, gastro-epiploic, &c. &c.
whilst there is no part in which they exist more often than in the
hemorrhoidal. Thus we have seen the preceding system dilated rarely
above, but very frequently below.

The system with black abdominal blood communicates but very little with
the general system; if there are anastomoses, it is only in the last
divisions; do these anastomoses exist? I believe we may consider these
two systems as independent of each other.


_Organization, Properties, &c._

Many authors, Haller in particular, considering that the system of
which we are treating is destitute of an agent of impulse, have
admitted in them a force of structure superior to that of the other
veins; but after examining it attentively, I am convinced that it is
precisely the same. The cellular covering, of a peculiar nature, which
surrounds it, and which is analogous to that of the other vessels, is
only a little more evident; this makes these veins at first appear
thicker; but by raising this covering we see that the internal membrane
is of the same nature, only perhaps a little less extensible. We do not
discover the venous longitudinal fibres so well as in the preceding
system; I doubt even if they exist in the trunks, in which we should
be able to see them better.

The two portions of this system, the hepatic and abdominal, appear to
be completely uniform in their structure. Only the first is every where
accompanied by a kind of membrane, which appears to be cellular, but
whose nature is not yet well known, and which is called the capsule of
Glisson. This capsule, intimately connected with the substance of the
liver, adheres more loosely to the veins; so that when they are empty,
there is often a space between them and it; it is this that makes them
fold up when we cut the liver in slices. I think that we are entirely
ignorant of the object of this anatomical arrangement.

The analogy between the systems with black blood, the abdominal and
general, supposes them the same in properties, sympathies, affections,
&c. I have often irritated the mesenteric veins, upon which it is
extremely easy to act, by drawing through a small wound of the abdomen
a portion of the intestinal canal; the results have always been the
same as in the preceding system. Only when we inject air, the animal
does not struggle, does not appear to suffer, and the experiment is not
fatal; this proves still more, that it is not by its contact upon the
veins or the heart, that the air is injurious, but by its action on the
brain.

The common membrane of the system of which we are treating, is
distinguished from that of the preceding, in this, that it is wholly
destitute of valves. This appears to be owing to two causes, 1st, to
this, that the course of the blood being shorter, it has less need of
being supported; and 2d, to this, that the middle part of this system,
wanting an agent of impulse, there is no reflux as in the preceding
system. In fact, at every contraction, the right auricle sends, as
I have said, a portion of its blood into the veins, which resist by
the valves. Here, on the contrary, the course of the fluid is always
uniform from one capillary system to the other; there is no cause of
retrograde motion.


_Remarks upon the motion of the Black Abdominal Blood._

This uniformity in the course of the motion of this black blood, is
not merely the result of the absence of the agent of impulse, but also
of this, that the liver does not present as many obstacles to it, as
the lungs do to the preceding black blood. Observe also that the liver
occupies in regard to this system, the same place as the lungs in
regard to the other; it is the termination of the circulation of which
we are treating. Having no dilatation or contraction, deprived of the
fluid which acts incessantly upon the lungs, and which, loaded with
different foreign substances, can often alter the vital forces of these
organs, so as to interrupt the passage of the blood, &c. The liver,
having a solid and granulated substance, in which no extraordinary
motion can take place, except those of the general locomotion of the
organ, is evidently incapable of frequently interrupting the course
of the black blood, which the abdominal system sends there. Add to
this the want of the agent of impulse, and you will understand, 1st.
why, when the abdomen is open, we never see a pulsation, a reflux
in the veins of the abdominal system, as we observe in those of the
other system; 2d. why we always find there nearly the same quantity
of blood; 3d. why, consequently, we do not discover, either in the
common trunk that corresponds to the heart, or in its branches, the
numberless varieties of dilatation and contraction, which the right
side of the heart, and all the great venous trunks so frequently
exhibit, so that scarcely two subjects are alike in this respect,
whilst here the arrangement is always nearly the same; 4th. why the
liver is not subject to the innumerable varieties in size that the
lungs are. This deserves a particular consideration. You will rarely
find the lungs twice containing the same quantity of blood; the weight
varies enormously in this respect. Now this arises from the greater or
less obstacles the blood has met with in passing through these organs
in the last moments of life. We can make them more or less heavy in
an animal, by making him die of asphyxia or hemorrhage, consequently
by filling with blood, or emptying the extremities of the pulmonary
artery. Whatever on the contrary is the kind of death, the hepatic
extremities of the abdominal system, contain always nearly the same
quantity of blood; suppose, that more remains than usual in this system
at the moment of death, it is generally distributed, because there is
no agent of impulse, which, at the last moments, drives the greatest
quantity to the liver, as happens to the lungs. We understand from
this, why the liver exhibits a firm, resisting texture, not extensible
like that of the lungs. Sometimes the blood enters it in greater or
less quantity, it is even, more or less heavy according to the kind
of death. But these varieties belong only to the hepatic veins, which
enter into the vena cave inferior just below the heart; they arise from
the greater or less reflux of blood that takes place there, as in all
the great venous trunks; they consequently arise almost always from the
lungs; so that when we see that they are loaded with blood, the right
auricle consequently distended, we may also be sure that the liver
contains more of this fluid than usual. But this phenomenon, of which I
shall speak when treating of the liver, is wholly disconnected with the
system which I am describing.

The mechanism of the circulation of the abdominal part of this system,
is precisely the same as that of the veins. As to that of the hepatic
part, it is unlike that of any other part of the economy. It has no
analogy to that of the arteries, for in them the heart is almost every
thing, and here there is nothing to correspond to that system; for
certainly there is no kind of contraction in the common trunk of the
two trees, as I have been frequently convinced. It is then the same
motion, which is continued from the gastric viscera to the liver. There
is still much obscurity to be removed concerning this motion, as well
as the preceding. Every judicious mind perceives that there is a great
void, in reading what has been written upon the motion of the general
venous blood, and upon this.

We cannot deny but that external agents do much in this last
circulation as in the first. The uniform elevation and depression of
the diaphragm, the corresponding motion of the abdominal parietes,
the alternate dilatation and contraction of the hollow viscera of the
abdomen, the constant locomotion of the small intestines, &c. all
these causes certainly have an influence upon the motion of the black
abdominal blood; and I even think, that the absence of most of them
contributes to retard this motion in the hemorrhoidal veins, and to
occasion varices in them.

This influence is not however such as Boerhaave thought, that the
circulation could not go on without it. In fact, when the abdomen of
an animal is opened, the blood is transmitted the same to the liver,
and spouts in the same manner from an open vessel; but we observe
a sensible weakness in a short time, and this before the general
circulation is enfeebled.


_Remarks upon the Liver._

The use of the liver, in being the termination of the black abdominal
blood, as the lungs are that of the black blood of all the rest of
the body, gives it an importance unknown to all the other secretory
organs. Some authors, in observing the enormous size of this viscus
compared to the quantity of fluid secreted by it, have suspected that
it had another use, besides the secretion of this fluid. This suspicion
appears to me, to amount almost to certainty. Compare the hepatic
excretories and reservoirs, with the same parts in the kidnies, the
salivary glands, the pancreas even, and you will see that they hardly
surpass them, and that they are inferior to those of the first. Then
compare the size of the liver with that of the kidnies, of the salivary
glands, &c. and you will see the difference. If on the other hand, we
examine the bile, voided with the stools which it colours, if we open
the intestines at the different periods of digestion, as I have done,
to see the quantity of this fluid that is poured out; if we keep an
animal without food in order to let it accumulate by itself in the
intestines; if we tie the ductus choledochus to retain the bile, &c. it
is impossible not to be convinced, that the quantity of this fluid is
disproportioned to the size of the liver. This viscus is alone equal in
size to all the other glands united; now, place on one side, the bile,
and on the other, all the secreted fluids, the urine, the saliva, the
pancreatic juice, the mucous juices; &c. you will see how enormous the
difference is.

Since then the secretion of bile is not the only object of the liver,
it must have some other use in the economy. What this is we are
ignorant; it is however undoubtedly connected with the existence of
the system with black blood of which it is the termination, and is
especially relative to this system. The following considerations appear
to prove that this use is among the most important.

1st. The liver exists in all classes of animals. In those even in
which most of the other essential viscera are very imperfect, it is
well developed. 2d. Most of the passions affect it particularly, many
of them have an exclusive effect upon it, whilst a great number of
the other glands hardly perceive them at all. 3d. In diseases, it
takes as evident a part as the first viscera in the economy. In many
nervous affections, in hypochondria, melancholy, &c. it has a great
influence compared to other glands. We know how easily its functions
are deranged. It has undoubtedly no connexion with some affections
called bilious, and which are seated exclusively in the stomach, but
it certainly has a part in most of them. Since there is no doubt that
the jaundice depends wholly upon a serious affection of this viscus,
we ought certainly to conclude that the yellow tinge of the face in
many of these affections, arises from a cause existing in this viscus,
and which is not sufficiently powerful to produce jaundice. Whether
in order to produce this tinge, the bile circulates or not with the
blood, is of no consequence; it is incontestible that it is occasioned
by affections of the liver; now the numerous cases in which it takes
place, prove how much this viscus is often affected; there is certainly
no gland in the animal economy so frequently. 4th. Shall I speak of
organic affections? compare in the examination of bodies, those of the
liver, with those of all the other organs of the same class, and you
will see that there is no one equal to it in this respect; the kidney
approaches it, in the frequency of the alteration of its texture, but
it is far from being equal to it. 5th. Who does not know the influence
of the liver upon temperaments? Who does not know that its predominance
gives to the external appearance, the functions, the passions, the
character even, a peculiar shade which the ancients have noticed, and
which modern observations have confirmed? Now see if the other glands
have a similar influence in the economy. 6th. The liver is, with the
heart and the brain, the organ that is first formed; it precedes all
the other organs in its development; it is incomparably superior, in
this respect, to all the glands.

From all these considerations, and from many others that I might
add, we may conclude, I think, that the unknown part which the liver
performs in the animal economy, besides the secretion of bile, is among
the most important. The study of this part, is one of the points most
worthy of arresting the attention of physiologists.

It has been said latterly, that the liver corresponded to the lungs in
their functions of removing from the blood its hydrogen and carbon. I
know not how this fact can be proved by experiment; but I am positive
that the liver does not turn the black blood of the abdominal system
into red. 1st. The blood of the right auricle is of the same colour
as that of the vena cava inferior; now if the blood went red from the
hepatic veins, it would certainly give a brighter tinge to that of the
auricle. 2d. Having opened the abdomen and thorax of a dog, I tied with
a curved needle the vena cava at its entrance into the heart and above
the kidney, then by detaching the liver from behind, I cut the portion
intercepted between the two ligatures, and where the hepatic veins
opened; the blood came out as black as that of the rest of the system.
3d. Tear out the liver of a living animal, examine immediately its
veins, you will see that they contain a blood analogous to that of the
others. 4th. This viscus, cut in slices in a living animal, pours out
behind an analogous fluid, except some small red streams furnished by
the last small branches of the hepatic artery; this is wholly different
in the same experiment made upon the lungs.

If the black abdominal blood receives any modifications of its nature
in the liver, they certainly have no influence upon its colour, its
consistence, or sensible qualities.

The general opinion is that the black abdominal blood serves for
the secretion of bile, and that the hepatic artery is only destined
to nourish the liver; this is what Haller has adopted; I have also
admitted it; but I am far from considering it as clearly demonstrated
as it has generally been thought to be; the following observations
prove, that we ought to consider it as an hypothesis somewhat uncertain.

1st. It is said that the hepatic blood, blacker, more oily, impregnated
with the vapours of the excrements, of a bitter taste even, approaches
nearer the nature of bile than the arterial blood, and that it is
consequently more proper to form it. I do not know whether this
blood has been analyzed comparatively; but I have certainly not
found any difference in its external attributes; I did think that
in an experiment I observed fatty drops swimming in it; different
experiments have convinced me that it was an error. I doubt whether
it could ever be demonstrated that the alkaline particles of aliments
and of excrements pass into the vena porta; this passage is a
gratuitous supposition. 2d. It is said that the volume of the liver is
considerable compared to the hepatic artery; this is true; but it is
not with the size of this viscus that we should compare that of this
artery, to know if it furnishes the materials of secretion, since we
have seen that it is impossible that the whole substance of the liver
should be destined to secrete bile; it is with the biliary ducts and
their reservoir, that we should make the comparison; now this artery
is exactly proportioned to these ducts; there is between them nearly
the same relation as between the renal artery and the ureter; on the
contrary, the biliary ducts are manifestly disproportioned to the vena
porta. 3d. It is said that the slow motion in this vein, is favourable
to the secretion of bile. But upon what positive data is this assertion
founded? Why is slowness of motion more necessary for this secretion
than for others? 4th. It is said that the hepatic artery having been
tied, the secretion of bile continued. But when we know the relation
of parts, the least reflection is sufficient to convince us, that a
ligature of this kind cannot be made without producing a derangement
that will prevent us from distinguishing any thing. I attempted it
once, but could not finish it; I was almost persuaded of it before.
5th. It is said that the black blood is more proper to furnish the
materials of the bile than the red. But what is the reason of it? is
it because this blood contains more carbon and hydrogen? But it is
then the black blood that furnishes the fat also; now all anatomists
are agreed, that it is exhaled from the exhalant extremities of the
arteries; the same is true of the marrow, the wax, and in general of
all the oily fluids. 6th. A fine injection, made in the hepatic portion
of the abdominal system with black blood, passes into the biliary
vessels. But a similar passage takes place in an injection from the
hepatic artery. 7th. It is said that the black abdominal blood in the
spleen has qualities essential to the bile. But the secretion of this
fluid can evidently take place without the spleen; many experiments
prove this. 8th. It is said that at the instant the vena porta is tied,
bile ceases to be secreted; it is undoubtedly less difficult to tie
the trunk of this vein below the duodenum than the hepatic artery. How
can we examine what is going on in the liver? Do we judge by the fluid
flowing from the hepatic duct? But open the duodenum, and you will
not very often see the bile running out at the opening of the ductus
choledochus, undoubtedly because the air contracts and irritates this
duct. This phenomenon, observed after a ligature is applied, is not
then conclusive; moreover there does flow towards the time of digestion
but too little bile by the ductus choledochus, to be able to estimate
it. In fine, what inference can be drawn from an animal whose abdomen
is open?

These different reflections prove, I think, that we have not
sufficiently direct proofs, to decide whether the secretion of bile
is from the abdominal black blood or the red. I do not attribute this
function more to one than the other; I say that these things should be
subjected to a new examination, and that this example is a proof that
the opinions most generally received in physiology, those consecrated
by the assent of all celebrated authors, often rest upon very uncertain
foundations. We are yet far from the time when this science will be
only a series of facts rigorously deduced from each other.

The hepatic artery has been said to resemble the bronchial, and the
hepatic vena porta the pulmonary artery; this is true in the general
arrangement; but what is the proof of it as it regards the functions?
On the contrary, I have proved above that those of the two last
vessels are not similar. Let us wait, before deciding, for further
and positive researches; let us doubt till then; let us not attribute
the secretion of bile to the hepatic artery, nor the vena porta, nor
to them unitedly. Certainly it is by one of these three means; but
which? what vessel furnishes the secretion of bile? what part does the
black abdominal blood perform in the liver, if it is not from it that
this fluid is secreted? what, in fine, is the function of the hepatic
artery, if it is not connected with this secretion? These are questions
to be resolved.

Physicians have also hazarded opinions upon the influence of the
black abdominal blood in diseases. Undoubtedly the expression, _vena
portarum, porta malorum_, contains a very true meaning; but certainly
in the present state of our knowledge, it is, in a strict sense, only a
play upon words. If we would express by it the frequency of affections
of the liver, it is without doubt just; but if it is employed to
express the influence of the vena porta in diseases, it is vague and
does not rest upon any positive fact. The more we open dead bodies, the
more we shall be convinced, I think, of the necessity of a precise and
accurate language, freed from all these ingenious, hypothetical ideas,
which do honour, it is true, to their author, but which retard science,
by introducing into it a manner of seeing hypothetically, and contrary
to the spirit of observation.


_Remarks upon the course of the Bile._

Though this question may be to a certain degree foreign to my object,
yet as the black abdominal blood has perhaps a real influence upon the
secretion of the bile, as my experiments upon this point determine
with precision the course of this fluid, I do not think it useless to
relate them here. All that is known further upon the uses, mechanism,
&c. of this secretion is to be found in works of physiology, to which I
refer.

There has been much discussion to ascertain if there was cystic and
hepatic bile, if one was of a different nature from the other, if their
quantity increased or varied, &c. Contrary and even opposite opinions
have been supported by numerous experiments made upon living animals,
as Haller has observed. These experiments, though at first view
contradictory, are not so, however, as I was convinced by repeating
them at different periods of digestion and during the abstinence of the
animal; it had not been done with precision. The following is what I
have observed in dogs, which I have used in my experiments.

1st. During abstinence, the stomach and small intestines being empty,
we find the bile in the ductus hepaticus and ductus choledochus
yellowish and clear; the surface of the duodenum and jejunum tinged by
bile which has the same appearance; the gall-bladder much distended by
a greenish, bitter bile, much deeper coloured and more abundant if the
abstinence has been long. 2d. During digestion in the stomach, which
may be prolonged for a length of time, by giving to a dog large pieces
of meat, which he swallows without masticating, things are nearly in
the same state. 3d. At the beginning of the intestinal digestion, we
find the bile of the hepatic duct always yellowish, that of the ductus
choledochus deeper coloured, the gall-bladder less full and its bile
already becoming clearer. 4th. At the end of digestion and immediately
after, the bile of the hepatic duct, of the ductus choledochus, that
in the gall-bladder, and that which is found upon the duodenum, are
of precisely the same colour as the common hepatic bile, that is, of
a clear yellow, and a little bitter. The gall-bladder is about half
full; it is flaccid, not contracted.

These observations, repeated a great number of times, evidently prove
that this, during abstinence and digestion, is the manner in which the
flow of bile takes place; 1st, it appears that at all times the liver
secretes a certain quantity, which is increased during digestion;
2d, that which is furnished during abstinence is divided between the
intestine that is always coloured with it, and the gall-bladder which
retains it, without pouring out any portion of it by the cystic duct,
and in which, thus retained, it acquires an acrid character and a deep
colour, necessary, no doubt, to digestion which is to follow. 3d.
When the aliments, having been digested by the stomach, pass into the
duodenum, then all the hepatic bile, which was before divided, flows
into the intestine, and even in greater abundance. On the other hand,
the gall-bladder pours also that which it contains upon the alimentary
mass, which is then completely penetrated with it. 4th. After
intestinal digestion, the hepatic bile diminishes, and a part begins to
flow into the duodenum, and a part to flow back into the gall-bladder,
in which, if then examined, it is found clear and in small quantity,
because it has had neither time to be coloured or accumulate.

There is then this difference between the two biles, that the hepatic
flows almost in a continued manner into the intestine, and that the
cystic flows back, except during digestion, into the gall-bladder, and
flows, during this function, towards the duodenum; or rather it is the
same fluid, of which a part always preserves the same character that
it had at its exit from the liver, and the other assumes a different
one in the gall-bladder. The diversity of colour in the cystic bile,
according as it has been retained long or not, has much analogy to the
colour of the urine, which is found more or less deep coloured, as it
has been for a longer or shorter time in the bladder.

As to the course of the bile in relation to the stomach, I believe
that this viscus contains a certain quantity of it at all times. When
empty, we find there a mixture of gastric juices and mucus more or
less abundant, sometimes mixed with small bubbles of hydrogen, which
burn when brought in contact with flame, and almost always tinged
with a yellowish colour from the bile that has flowed up through the
pylorus. Haller says that this reflux of bile into the stomach does not
always happen; Morgagni says that it always does in men. I have never
opened a dog, in whom it has not been seen when the stomach was empty,
especially if it had been so for some time. Human dead bodies are not
proper to decide this question, because the kind of disease alters
almost inevitably the course, the nature, and even the colour of the
bile. I shall say in another volume what conclusion we should draw from
this, as it respects bilious vomitings.

In a state of fulness, it has sometimes appeared to me impossible
to estimate the reflux of the bile; in other states, between the
alimentary mass and the parietes of the stomach, I have seen yellowish,
gastric fluids; but this mass itself never has this colour.

The bile that flows into the stomach has always appeared to me to be
hepatic bile, from its light colour. I think that I have opened a
sufficient number of living animals to convince me, that this bile is
hardly ever found very green, and that it acquires this colour from the
gall-bladder; and that it is this that is brought up by vomiting in
some affections. The reflux of this bile appears to be an effect of the
affection itself. This observation agrees with that made above, viz.
that the hepatic bile alone flows into the duodenum in abstinence. It
alone can then, as we may be convinced, flow into the stomach. During
intestinal digestion, in which the cystic bile flows, it is evident,
that the aliments going continually out of the pylorus, prevent it from
passing there and entering the stomach; that which we find during
fulness, was there then, or entered there before the peristaltic motion
had begun to evacuate this organ.

When we open the gall-bladder in a dead body, we see that the bile
there exhibits, according to its diseases, a variety of shades of
colour, from that which is black as ink to a kind of transparent
fluid. Ought we then to be astonished, if the vomitings in which the
cystic bile is brought up, that has flowed into the stomach against
the ordinary course of things, should contain matters of such various
colours?


_Development._

In the fœtus, the system of black abdominal blood is not insulated; it
becomes a part of the two others, by means of the ductus venosus. There
is then truly but one vascular system in the fœtus, whilst after birth,
there are three separate ones, two with black blood and one with red.

In the fœtus, it is especially with the umbilical vein that the
abdominal system with black blood is continued. The liver is a centre,
in which both arrive from two different sides, and in which they unite,
in a common trunk. The two columns of blood that they circulate, do not
meet directly; their course forms a very remarkable angle.

When we examine attentively the orifice of the ductus venosus in the
trunk, made by the union of these two veins, we see that it presents
itself naturally to the blood of the umbilical vein; that that of the
vena porta, on the contrary, cannot enter there. In fact, there is a
little fold in the form of a valve, less evident, it is true, than
many others, but yet existing. This fold is only a kind of projection,
placed between the end of the vena porta and the ductus venosus, and
which contracts the orifice of this, so that it is evidently narrower
than the caliber of its own canal. The blood coming from the vena
porta and passing at the side of this fold, presses it against the
orifice, and thus forms an obstacle; that coming from the umbilical
vein, falling, on the contrary, perpendicularly on this orifice,
removes this fold, and enters the canal.

It hence follows that the ductus venosus is evidently destined to carry
to the vena cava the residue of the blood of the umbilical vein; I say
the residue; in fact, as this vein is very large and the ductus small
in proportion to it, it is evident that the greatest part of the blood
penetrates the liver, by the different ramifications that enter its
substance.

The abdominal vascular system is less developed in the fœtus than
afterwards; it consequently carries less blood to the liver; this is
the same arrangement as in all the other veins. I would observe, that
the small quantity, however, which the liver receives in this way, is
more than compensated by that of the umbilical vein. This viscus is,
then, habitually entered in the fœtus, by a greater quantity of fluid
than at any of the other ages. Hence, 1st, why its nutrition is so
developed and its size so great; 2d, why it is, in proportion to its
size, heavier than in the after ages; 3d, why when we cut it in slices,
there flows out a greater quantity of blood; 4th, why, when we dry
slices of the liver of a fœtus, of the same thickness as others taken
from the liver of an adult, and especially of an old person, they are
reduced to a less size.

The disproportion of the size of the liver of the fœtus is more
evident, the sooner it is examined after conception; this is the
same as with the brain. As the fœtus advances towards birth, the
liver approximates in its proportions to the other organs, that which
it will have in the adult. From the observations of Portal, it is
especially till the seventh month, that the liver is predominant. This
circumstance appears to arise from this, that the umbilical vein
transmits as much more blood in proportion to the fœtus, as it is less
advanced in age.

At this age, the blood of the umbilical vein and that of the vena
porta evidently mix, at least in a great measure, in the common trunk.
Is their nature analogous? There is no experimental knowledge upon
this point. But Baudelocque has many times observed that that of the
umbilical vein is redder, and even approximates the nature of arterial
blood. I have not accurately observed this fact in any animals except
guinea pigs, in whom the want of transparency in the cord does not
allow us to see a great difference in the blood of the arteries and of
the umbilical vein; but this difference can be in fact more evident
in man; now, in this case, the umbilical blood appears to lose this
redness in the liver, for very certainly it is uniform beyond this
viscus in the circulation of the fœtus, as I have often ascertained.

At the period of birth, the blood ceasing to come by the umbilical
vein, the liver becomes only the termination of the black abdominal
blood. Then a kind of revolution takes place in this viscus. The
different tubes that carried to it umbilical blood do not close up, but
they transmit exclusively that of the vena porta, which increases a
little in size, because digestion, which begins in the gastric organs,
calls to them more arterial blood, and consequently more is returned by
the veins. This slight increase does not compensate for the absence of
the umbilical blood; thus the liver diminishes proportionally in size
in an evident manner.

As to the ductus venosus, it is obliterated by the effect of the
contractility of texture. The blood coming in the vena porta, has not,
as I have said, any tendency to pass through it, because this canal is
not in its direction; it passes rather into the hepatic vessels, and
the circulation of the liver is established then, as it will always
continue to be.

This then is the difference that birth brings to the hepatic
circulation; 1st, less blood and only one kind entering the liver; 2d,
an interruption of all communication between the general and abdominal
black blood; 3d, proportional diminution of the size of the liver.
Hence there is an inverse phenomenon for this organ and for the lungs.
The latter increases, the other diminishes in activity and size.

The great quantity of blood that enters the liver before birth, and the
size of this organ, compared to the small quantity of bile that escapes
from it, are an evident proof then that it is destined for other uses
besides the secretion of this fluid. There cannot be a doubt upon this
point; it is a proof moreover, that in the adult the disproportion
of the organ to the fluid, though less sensible, supposes also in it
another important function of which we are ignorant.

There ought to be a precise relation between the obliteration of the
ductus venosus, of the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus, between
the increased activity of the lungs and the diminished activity of the
liver at birth, &c. We judge of this relation, without knowing it,
because a veil is still spread over the circulation of the fœtus. I
would only observe that the predominance of the liver before birth,
does not suppose any in the system of black abdominal blood; it arises
exclusively from the umbilical vein; thus the proportional volume of
this organ is constantly diminishing afterwards, especially on the
left side, where this vein is distributed, as Portal has observed. It
is difficult to name the period, at which the equilibrium is generally
established.

In youth, the abdominal system of black blood, like the general, is
weak. It is towards the thirtieth or fortieth year, that it seems to
be in its greatest activity; this is the age of gastric diseases, of
hemorrhoids, and of melancholy, which is connected with the state of
the liver.

In old age, the dilatation of the system of black abdominal blood is
much less sensible than that of the preceding system; its vessels
have nearly the same caliber as in the adult age; which supposes a
less diminution in the velocity of the course of its blood, from the
principles established above. It never becomes the seat of any kind
of osseous incrustation, a phenomenon that evidently assimilates
its common membrane to that of the veins, and distinguishes it in a
peculiar manner from that of the arteries.


END OF VOL. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation, spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.

The large TABLE OF PHYSIOLOGY used curved braces to indicate groups.
For clarity these have been replaced by rectangular braces. In
addition, to fit within page width considerations, the first column of
these tables has been transposed into individual table section headings.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of General Anatomy, Applied to Physiology
and Medicine, Vol. 1 (of 3), by Xavier Bichat


, VOL 2 ***




Produced by Sonya Schermann, Les Galloway and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







                           GENERAL ANATOMY,

                              APPLIED TO

                       PHYSIOLOGY AND MEDICINE;

                           BY XAVIER BICHAT,

       PHYSICIAN OF THE GREAT HOSPITAL OF HUMANITY AT PARIS, AND
                 PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY.

                      Translated from the French.

                        BY GEORGE HAYWARD, M.D.

         FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES,
               AND OF THE MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL SOCIETY.

                       _IN THREE VOLUMES._

                             VOLUME II.

                            _BOSTON_:
                   PUBLISHED BY RICHARDSON AND LORD.

                       J. H. A. FROST, PRINTER.
                                 1822.




DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS, _to wit_:

  DISTRICT CLERK'S OFFICE.

BE IT REMEMBERED, that on the seventeenth day of April, A.D. 1822,
in the forty-sixth year of the Independence of the United States of
America, _Richardson & Lord_, of the said District, have deposited
in this office the title of a book, the right whereof they claim as
proprietors, in the words following, _to wit_:

"General Anatomy, applied to Physiology and Medicine; by Xavier Bichat,
Physician of the Great Hospital of Humanity at Paris, and Professor of
Anatomy and Physiology. Translated from the French, by George Hayward,
M. D. Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and of the
Massachusetts Medical Society. In three Volumes. Volume II."

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States,
entitled, "An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by securing the
Copies of Maps, Charts and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of
such Copies, during the times therein mentioned:" and also to an Act
entitled, "An Act supplementary to an Act, entitled, An Act for the
encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts and
Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies during the times
therein mentioned; and extending the Benefits thereof to the Arts of
Designing, Engraving and Etching Historical and other Prints."

  JOHN W. DAVIS,
  _Clerk of the District of Massachusetts._




CAPILLARY SYSTEMS.


The two great vascular systems, with red and black blood arise and
terminate, as we have said, in the capillaries, which form in the
lungs, as in all the other parts the limits that separate them, and in
which they are changed from one to the other. There are then evidently
two capillary systems distinct from each other, and which are even
opposite. One, generally spread throughout the body, is the seat of
the change of red blood into black. The other, confined wholly to the
lungs, exhibits an opposite phenomenon; it is in its divisions that the
black blood becomes red.

As the capillaries, which serve for the origin and termination of the
black abdominal blood, are intermixed on both sides with those of the
general capillary system, since in the abdomen they are continued with
the arteries and in the liver give origin to the veins, I shall omit
them in these remarks, and attend only to the general and pulmonary
capillary systems.

These two capillary systems, the first especially, deserve the more
particular consideration, 1st, because the circulation is governed
in it by laws wholly different from those of the other parts; 2d,
because most of the important functions of life take place there, as
secretions, nutrition, exhalations, &c.; 3d, because their small tubes
are affected on many occasions by diseases, as they are the seat of
inflammations, metastases, &c.; 4th, because animal heat is especially
produced in these tubes, &c.

The lowest species of animals have in reality only a capillary
circulation. Their fluids do not move in great masses, in canals which
carry them to all parts of the body, and afterwards bring them back
again. There is only an insensible oscillation of these fluids, in
tubes of the greatest delicacy and number. This kind of circulation is
one of the points of contact, or rather of transition from animals to
vegetables, which, destitute of the circulation with a sensible motion,
have evidently like the zoophytes, that of an insensible motion and of
the capillary vessels.

I shall first examine the general capillary system, and afterwards the
pulmonary.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE GENERAL CAPILLARY SYSTEM.

This system exists in all the organs; all are in fact composed of an
infinity of capillaries, which cross, unite, separate and unite again,
by communicating in a thousand ways with each other. The vessels of
any considerable size, those among the arteries, in which the blood
circulates by the influence of the heart, and those among the veins,
which correspond to the first, have really no connexion with the
structure of the organs; they wind along their interstices; and are
lodged in the cellular texture that separates their lobes; but the
capillaries alone essentially make part of these organs, they are so
combined with them; that they truly enter into the composition of
their texture. It is in this view, that we may with truth consider the
animal body as an assemblage of vessels.

From this first view, it is evident that the extent of the general
capillary system is immense, that it embraces all the smallest
divisions of our bodies, so that we can hardly conceive of any organic
particles united without capillaries. It follows hence, that this
system is not only an intermediate one between the arteries and the
veins. It is from it, that all the exhalants, all the excretories,
&c. go. It furnishes all the vessels that carry nutritive matter to
our organs; we ought to describe it then as existing in parts where
arteries do not penetrate, as well as in those where they do.


I. _General Division of the Capillaries._

Since this system is not destined merely to unite the arteries to the
veins, and change the black blood to red, it is evident that other
fluids besides the blood, must circulate in them; this is in fact what
observation proves. There are many parts in the animal economy, in
which white fluids alone circulate. We know the hypothetical opinions
of Boerhaave upon the white arteries, the decreasing vessels, &c. We
shall find these opinions in all books; I shall only say here what
accurate observation shows us. That there is in the general capillary
system, parts in which the blood especially moves, others pervaded
only by white, or greyish fluids, &c. is a thing of inspection, and
has no need of proofs. But what is the proportion of these fluids in
the different organs? it is this that must be examined; now there are
parts where the blood predominates almost exclusively in the capillary
system, others where it exists in part, and in which there is a portion
of different fluids, others in fine in which these fluids alone are
found.


_Of the Organs in which the Capillaries contain only Blood._

It appears that in the muscular system, in the spleen, in certain
parts of the mucous surfaces, as in the pituitary membrane, &c. the
blood so predominates in the capillary tubes, that almost every other
fluid is unknown in them; thus fine injections demonstrate few other
vessels; the arteries and the veins are seen there in great abundance.
The blood, or its colouring matter, is in them, as I shall say, in two
different states; in one, it stagnates and serves then to colour the
organ; in the other, it circulates and contributes to its nutrition,
its excitement, &c.


_Of the Organs in which the Capillaries contain Blood and Fluids
differing from it._

These organs are the most numerous in the animal economy. The bones,
the cellular texture, the serous membranes, a part of the fibrous
system, the skin, the vascular parietes, the glands, &c. &c. exhibit
this arrangement in a very remarkable manner.

To give an idea of the capillary system in this kind of organs, let us
take one in which it is easy to examine it, the serous membranes, for
example. When we lay them bare in a living animal, their transparency
permits us to see in an evident manner that they contain but very
little blood in their capillary system; there are many branches under
them, but they appear to be only contiguous; raise, for example, in a
small living guinea-pig the peritoneal coat of the stomach; the red
arteries, which at first view appeared to be in this coat, remain
untouched. These membranes, certainly owe their white or greyish colour
to the small quantity of blood they receive from their small vessels,
to which the next trunks give rise. After having thus exposed a serous
membrane, in order to see the quantity of blood that is found in it in
a natural state, irritate it with any stimulant; at the end of some
time, it will be covered by an infinity of reddish streaks, which will
be so numerous, that they will change its whiteness into the red colour
of the mucous surfaces.

Force fine injections into a dead body, they will so fill the capillary
system of the serous surfaces, of those of the peritoneum, for example,
that those surfaces will be wholly black, and appear formed only by
a net-work of vessels, whilst very few are apparent in the living
body, because it is not the blood that fills them. When we cannot open
animals to convince us of this, surgical operations, in which the
intestines are laid bare, the peritoneum being untouched, wounds of the
abdomen, the cesarian operation, &c. will prove incontestably that in
the natural state, the blood fills ten and even twenty times less of
the vessels, upon the serous surfaces, than injections show us in their
texture.

Examine these surfaces in chronic and acute inflammations, of which
they are the seat, in the first especially, they exhibit a vascular
net-work, so full of blood, that their redness is often deeper than
that of the muscles.

All the organs of which I have spoken above, exhibit the same
phenomenon. Observe what takes place in the skin; fine injections show
there infinitely more vessels than are filled with blood in a natural
state; the face of a child well injected, is wholly black. Who does not
know that oftentimes from the effect of passion, the blood fills with
great rapidity, in the skin of the cheeks, numerous vessels, which in a
calm state of mind are not apparent?

Examine the conjunctiva, taken as an example in inflammations;
frequently in a short time it changes its white to a bright red,
because the blood fills vessels, in which it did not before pass; you
can easily distinguish these vessels with the naked eye; you can see
that the blood accumulated in this membrane, is not effused, but that
it is contained in real vessels.

I take for example the organs that have one of their surfaces free from
adhesion, because the state of the capillary system is more easily
distinguished in them; but the others present the same phenomenon; we
shall see that the cellular texture, certain fibrous organs, &c. &c.
examined comparatively, on the one hand in animals that we dissect
alive, on the other in an inflammatory state or after fine injections,
present a much less number of vessels in the first, than the second
case.

It can then be established as an incontestable fact, that in many of
the organs of the animal economy, the general capillary system is,
in the ordinary state, entered in part by blood, in part by other
different fluids, that appear to be white.

The proportions vary singularly; thus the capillary system of the
serous membranes contains hardly any blood as I have said; that of the
skin more; the mucous surfaces still more, &c. But whatever may be the
relation, the difference is not less real in the capillary system.

Perhaps also there are always in this system empty vessels, destined
to receive fluids under certain circumstances; thus the urethra, the
excretory ducts in certain cases, the orifices of the lacteals in the
intervals of digestion, contain nothing. It is difficult to conceive
of the rapidity of the passage of the blood in the capillaries of the
face, and in those of other parts of the skin, if these vessels contain
a fluid, which is to be displaced by the blood. However, nothing but
what is founded upon experiment can serve to decide this question.


_Of the Organs in which the Capillaries do not contain Blood._

These organs are less numerous than the preceding. They are the
tendons, the cartilages, the hair, certain ligaments, &c. Dissected in
a living animal, not a single drop of blood escapes from these organs,
and yet there is no doubt that capillaries exist in them; oftentimes
very fine injections demonstrate them there. Inflammation, also,
frequently fills these capillaries with blood. Into the hair, this
fluid enters in the plica polonica, &c. The non-vascular appearance
of these organs in the living body, is illusory; it is because their
fluids are divided into very small streams, the circulation of them is
more slow, and their colour different from the blood, that we cannot
perceive them.


II. _Difference of Organs in respect to the number of their
Capillaries._

Though the capillaries exist every where, yet they are more or less
numerous in the different organs; in making fine injections, it is easy
to be convinced of this. What anatomist has not been struck by the
prodigious number of vessels in this way developed, upon the skin, the
serous surfaces, the cellular texture, &c. compared with those in the
fibrous organs, in the muscles even, &c.?

I have sought for the cause of this difference, and it has not appeared
difficult to find it, since where injections develop few capillaries,
there is only nutrition going on, as the bones, the muscles, the
cartilages, the fibrous bodies, &c. are a constant proof; on the
contrary, in all those in which many fluids enter, there are, besides
nutrition, other functions, such as exhalation and secretion. Hence why
a serous surface, almost as white as a cartilage in the living body,
becomes ten times darker than it by the same fine injection; why the
skin, compared to the fibrous organs, exhibits the same phenomenon;
why in proportion to the arteries that enter a muscle and a gland, the
latter admits much more injection than the other.

These observations, which are uniform and invariable, prove that the
capillary system is as much more developed in a part, as it has more
functions to sustain. Observe in fine, that it is a kind of depot
in which the fluids remain for a certain time, before serving for
nutrition, exhalation and secretion. Where these three functions are
united, it is necessary that there should be more fluids there, than
where only one of them exists; hence more capillary vessels.

The capillary system is not then in the organs in proportion to their
size; a portion of the pleura contains more vessels than a tendon that
is ten times larger. It is the nutritive substance that fills the place
that these vessels do not occupy.

We might, from what has just been said, divide the systems into two
classes, from the development of their capillaries; place on one side
the serous, the mucous, the glandular, the dermoid, the synovial,
the cellular, &c.; on the other the osseous, the cartilaginous, the
fibrous, the arterial, the venous, the fibro-cartilaginous, &c. The
first class surpasses the second, considerably, in the number of its
small vessels. Observe, also, that inflammation, different eruptions,
all the affections, in which there is, as it is called, an afflux of
humours to a part, are infinitely more frequent in the first than the
second class, because all these affections are essentially seated in
the capillary system, which is more developed in them.

Asphyxia, apoplexy, and all the affections that make the black blood
stagnate in the general capillary system, prove the same thing; in
fact, examine the livid head of one who has died of asphyxia, or of
apoplexy, you will see that it is especially in the skin and the
cellular texture that the blood is arrested; that the muscles, the
aponeuroses, exhibit besides the blood ordinarily found in them, only a
small quantity of superabundant fluid, in comparison with what there is
in the first organs.


_Remarks upon Injections._

From all that has been said, it is evident, that fine injections,
which form a convenient method of knowing the capillary system of an
organ, cannot show which vessels of this system admit red blood, and
which circulate only white fluids. In fact, the injected matter passes
equally into each, and we cannot distinguish that, which in the living
body is very distinct.

In order to form a precise and accurate idea of the quantity of
blood that enters each of the organic systems during life, it is
indispensably necessary to dissect those systems during life. I shall
frequently have occasion in this work, to make this truth felt, which
appears to me to be of much importance in many respects. If a fine
injection but partially succeeds, it almost always shows vessels that
really exist, but which were not sanguineous during life. Even the
coarse injections of our dissecting rooms frequently exhibit these
phenomena, especially in the face, the neck, &c.; and much more so, if
the matter injected is very delicate, and managed with much address. I
cannot conceive why physiologists have always taken as an indication of
the blood vessels, the state of injected organs; by opening any part of
a living animal, they may clearly see how deceptive this method is.

Injections are of no advantage except in the great vessels, in which
the blood circulates in a mass by the influence of the heart; in the
capillaries, they do not reach the precise point that exists in nature.

I wish that in dissecting rooms, the pupils, after having dissected
the arteries and veins, would finish their labours upon the vessels
by the dissection of a living animal, for the purpose of seeing the
quantity of blood that each system has in its capillaries; this
knowledge is essential to the study of inflammations, fungous tumours,
&c. Anatomical cabinets in which preparations are kept, are of no use
in this respect; these preparations are more likely to deceive in
proportion as the injections have succeeded well.


III. _Of the proportions which exist in the Capillaries between the
Blood and the Fluids that differ from it._

In the organs in which the blood, or the white fluids differing from
it, alone enter, there can be no variety in the proportions; but the
varieties are frequent in those where these fluids enter at the same
time. In the serous, the dermoid, the mucous systems, &c. there are
sometimes more, sometimes less small vessels filled with blood; the
cheeks, of which I have spoken, are a remarkable example of this.
The least emotion, the slightest agitation, or a motion a little too
violent, accumulates, diminishes, and varies, in a thousand different
ways, the quantity of blood in them. The whole exterior of the skin
exhibits the same phenomenon, though less frequently. When this organ
is irritated or excited at any point, it immediately reddens; it
becomes white if it is compressed. Cold and heat uniformly produce
analogous varieties, when the change from one to the other is sudden.
All the mucous surfaces exhibit the same arrangement; see the glans in
the erection of coition, or in the flaccidity that succeeds it; the
difference in the quantity of the blood that this external membrane
contains, is very evident. Lay bare a serous surface; at first
white, soon there will be numerous red streaks. If we could see the
capillaries of the glands, I presume that we should find the quantity
of blood variable in these vessels, and that during the time that the
secreted fluids are poured out in abundance, their system would be
more copiously supplied than at any of the time when it furnishes the
materials of the secretions. Why are not the kidnies and the liver
subject to the same varieties in the quantity of their blood, as the
surface of the skin? When, by a violent motion, sweat pours out in
abundance, and the external surface of the body looks more red, does it
not indicate that the blood is there in a greater proportion?

There are two things to be distinguished, however, upon this subject;
it is only when the copious secretions arise from an increase of
life, that a greater afflux of blood is supposed to take place in the
glandular system. When this increased secretion proceeds from a want
of vital energy, the blood is not in greater quantity in the gland.
The same observation applies to exhalation; thus, in the above case,
in the commencement of fever, &c. more blood enters the skin; but when
the sweat arises from weakness, as in phthisis, &c. there is not this
accumulation of blood in the capillary system. But this deserves a
longer explanation.


 _Different proportions of Blood in the Capillaries, according as the
 Secretions and Exhalations are active or passive._

I call those exhalations and secretions active, which are preceded
and accompanied by an evident development of vital forces; and
those passive which exhibit an opposite phenomenon. If we examine
the phenomena of the animal economy, it will be easy to see this
distinction, which appears to me essential in diseases; now, in
whatever organ you study it, you will always see every active
exhalation or secretion preceded by a greater afflux of blood to the
part; all passive exhalations and secretions present an opposite
phenomenon. Let us begin with exhalations.

1st. Cutaneous exhalation is active from violent running, or a paroxysm
of fever, as I have said, from the action of caloric upon the body,
hard work, &c.; the skin is then more expanded and deeper coloured;
more blood enters it, &c. This excitement of the skin makes it more
fit to be influenced by external agents, and to influence in its turn
all the other organs. It is the suppression of these transpirations
which causes so many accidents in the animal economy. Observe, on the
contrary, the complexion of the body in phthisical sweats, in those
produced by internal suppurations, in those that are the effect of
fear, in all those that are called colliquative, &c.; this complexion
is more pale than in a natural state; it is not capable of being
influenced, because its vital activity is then small, and its forces
languish.

2d. In the exhalations of the serous surfaces, there are some that are
essentially active; such is that of pus; for we shall see that the
formation of this fluid upon these membranes is without any kind of
erosion, that it flows evidently from the exhalants, instead of serum;
very often even it flows at the same time. Nothing is more frequent, in
fact, than the milky or purulent serum that is found in the peritoneum,
the pleura, &c. whether the fluids are exactly mixed, or the pus
floats in flakes in the serum. Now this active exhalation of serum or
of pus, which appears to be here principally coagulated albumen, this
exhalation, I say, is evidently preceded by a considerable accumulation
of blood in the capillary system, an accumulation which constitutes
inflammation, and without which exhalation cannot take place. Observe,
on the contrary, serous exhalation, increased by the weakness that any
organic disease gives to the serous membranes; to furnish this fluid,
the blood is never accumulated in them in greater quantity. Open the
membranous sacs, after the diseases of the heart, the womb, the lungs,
the liver, the spleen, &c. you will find them full of water, but more
diaphanous than usual, because they have received less blood.

3d. What I have said of the serous exhalations, must be said of the
cellular; some of them are active, such as those of pus and the
serum that sometimes accompanies it; others are passive, as the
leucophlegmasia after organic diseases. The same observation is to be
made as before; there is an accumulation of blood in the capillary
system in the first kind, a diminution of this fluid in the second.
Observe the fatty exhalation; a man in health who is very fat, has a
rosy colour upon the integuments distended with fat, which indicates
the abundance of blood in the capillary system. On the contrary, in
certain cases of sudden corpulency after diseases, in that which
is called false fat, and accompanies weakness, a general paleness
corresponding with the fatty bloating, indicates the absence of the
sanguineous fluid.

4th. Mucous exhalations present also an analogous phenomenon. I
shall prove soon that the hemorrhages from the mucous surfaces are
real exhalations; now some of them are active, a name which Pinel
has given them in his Nosography; these are the nasal, pulmonary,
gastric, uterine hemorrhages, &c. of young people and even of adults.
All these hemorrhages are accompanied by a local increase of action,
by greater heat, by a deeper colour of the mucous membrane, by the
greater abundance of blood in the capillary system. Who does not
know, that Galen predicted a hemorrhage from the redness which he
saw upon the nose and the eye of the patient? On the other hand,
observe the hemorrhages of the mucous surfaces, which take place
after long diseases, hemoptysis, which terminates the diseases of the
heart, hematemesis, the effect of organic derangement of the liver,
hemorrhages from the intestinal canal, so frequent at the end of all
the long organic diseases of the abdomen, &c. nasal hemorrhages in
certain low fevers, those which take place in scurvy from the different
mucous surfaces, the gums especially, &c. all these hemorrhages, which
are truly passive are not accompanied by this preliminary sanguineous
congestion in the capillaries, by this increased activity of vital
action; it might be said that it is the blood, which transudes, as
in the dead body, through the pores, that have not power to retain
it. This distinction is so true, that without making a theory of it,
physicians conform to it in their practice. We bleed to arrest an
active hemoptysis, but would you bleed to stop that which comes on in
the chronic diseases of the thorax? The same observation applies to
all the hemorrhages; they require means wholly opposite, according as
they are active or passive; a remark moreover that is applicable to
all diseases that have increased exhalations or secretions, whatever
may be their seat. It is not the phenomenon that we are to resist, but
the cause that has produced it. We diminish the forces, when serum is
accumulated in the thorax, from a pleurisy; we increase them, when it
accumulates from a disease of the heart, the lungs, &c.

What I have just said of exhalations applies to secretions. The mucous
glands pour out a greater quantity of fluids in two ways, sometimes
from irritation, sometimes from the want of force. When this happens
in the intestines, there results from it in the first case a diarrhœa
from irritation, in the second a colliquative one. Now it appears
that the blood enters the gland in greater abundance in the one than
the other case. Its increase takes place undoubtedly in most acute
catarrhs, in which there is active secretion of mucus; its diminution
or at least its want of increase is not less sensible in many chronic
catarrhs, in which we may consider the secretion as passive. We know
that the abundance of urine, of bile, sometimes supposes an increased,
sometimes a diminished action of the kidney and the liver. Is there not
a superabundance of semen from excess of vitality, and an unnatural
flow from weakness? All the secreted fluids have the same arrangement;
now according to these two opposite causes of the superabundance of
the secreted fluids, the capillary system of the glands is certainly
penetrated with a different quantity of blood. Though the phenomenon
be the same, the treatment in the diseases in which it is manifest,
is as in the preceding cases, wholly opposite, according as the local
increase or diminution of life concurs to produce it.


_Consequences of the preceding Remarks._

From all that I have said, it is evident that in the organs whose
capillary system contains in part blood, and in part different fluids,
the proportion of the first to the others is infinitely variable; that
a thousand causes in a state of health, as in that of disease, by
bringing to the organ more or less blood, can fill more or less its
capillary system.

The trunks and branches that go to an organ, are they more or less
dilated, according as the capillary system of this organ is more or
less filled with blood? For example, when the mucous glands pour out
fluid in the greatest quantity, are the neighbouring branches more
full? Some experiments that I shall mention hereafter do not seem to
prove it.


IV. _Of the Anastomoses of the General Capillary System._

All that has been said evidently supposes a free communication
established between all the parts of the capillary system; this
communication is in fact clearly demonstrated by observation. When we
examine a serous injected surface, of which the capillary system is
full, we see that this system is a real net-work with fine meshes, and
in which no vessel runs a distance of more than two lines, without
communicating with others. The passage then, is constantly open between
the portion that receives blood, and that which admits fluids differing
from it. The same arrangement exists in the dermoid system, in the
origins of the mucous, &c. and in general in all those in which the
capillary system contains blood and white fluids.

On the other hand, the organs in which we find only white fluids,
evidently communicate with those that are near them, and in which there
is blood; those in which blood alone flows, have the same arrangement.

The capillary system must then be considered as a general net-work,
spread throughout the body, which communicates on one side in every
organ, and on the other from one organ to another. In this respect
there is from the head to the feet a general anastomosis, a free
communication for the fluids. It is in this way that we can conceive
of the permeability of the body, and not from the cellular texture, in
which the serous and fatty fluids alone stagnate.

As the arteries enter the capillary system, and as the veins, the
exhalants, the secretories, go from it, it is evident from this manner
of considering the capillary system, that all these vessels ought to
communicate with each other; that by pushing a fine fluid into the
arteries, it should go out by the excretories, the exhalants, and
return by the veins, after having gone through the capillary system;
this is in fact what takes place. In this respect, a thousand ways
are constantly open for the blood to escape from its vessels, which
communicate thus everywhere without, and do not present any mechanical
obstacle to the blood in their cavity, which life alone retains within
the limits of its circulation. The oozings after death through the
exhalants, the excretories and the veins, are so well known, so many
anatomists have related examples of them, that I think it unnecessary
to give them in detail here. We have seen, then, fine injections pour
out upon the serous membranes, upon the pericardium, the pleura, the
peritoneum, &c. transude upon the mucous surfaces, even upon the skin.
We have seen them flow through the ureters, the pancreatic, biliary,
salivary ducts, &c. Haller, in the article upon each organ, has not
failed to relate examples of this sort, which prove the communication
of the arteries with all the other vessels, by means of the capillary
net-work. What anatomist has not sometimes made even coarse injections
return by the veins? The communication of these vessels with the
arteries, through the capillary system, is now an anatomical axiom. At
one time, it arrested much attention. It has been asked, if there was
any thing intermediate between the arteries and the veins; inspection
proves that the capillary system alone is there.

Hence it is necessary to represent the capillary system as a kind
of general reservoir, in which the arteries enter on one side, and
from which go out on the other side, in all the organs, the nutritive
exhalants, in some, certain particular exhalants, as those of the
sweat, the lymph, the fat, &c. in others the secretory vessels, &c. It
is a common reservoir, if I may so express myself, in which the red
blood enters, and from which the black blood, the exhaled, the secreted
fluids, &c. go out.

This idea is not hypothetical; the injections of which I have spoken
are the most evident proof of it. Let it not be said that it is a
transudation after death, analogous to that of the bile through the
gall-bladder: if it were so, not only the fine fluids injected would
go out by the excretories and the exhalants, and return by the veins;
but in oozing through the pores, they would fill the whole cellular
texture. On the contrary, nothing escapes into the cellular texture,
around the vessels by which the injection passes; there is then a
continuity of tubes from the artery which has received the fluid, to
the excretory, the exhalant, or the vein which transmits it.

These are the communications of the capillary system that explain
how the skin becomes livid on the place on which a dead body has
for a long time lain, as on the back, for example; how by turning a
dead body, so that the head may hang down, it becomes full of fluid;
how, on the contrary, by placing upright the body of one dead from
apoplexy, asphyxia, &c. the capillary system of the face is freed
in a great measure from the blood it contained; how an erysipelas
disappears on a dead body, when the blood, arrested during life on a
part of the skin, by the vital action, is spread after death to all the
surrounding parts; how every kind of analogous redness of the skin,
and even of the serous surfaces, disappears because the blood goes by
the communications of the capillary system to the neighbouring organs.
During life the tonic action retains the fluid in a determinate part;
abandoned to its gravity, and other physical causes, after death, it
soon disappears from the part in which it was accumulated, on account
of the innumerable communications of the general capillary system.

I would observe to those who examine dead bodies, that these
considerations are very important. Thus we must not judge of the
quantity of blood which penetrated the inflamed peritoneum or pleura,
by what is seen twenty-four hours after death; local irritation was a
permanent cause that fixed the blood in the part; this cause having
ceased, it escapes from it. A serous membrane may have been very much
inflamed during life, and yet exhibit almost its natural appearance
after death; as it is in erysipelas. I should have been often tempted
from opening dead bodies, to deny the existence of an affection which
had been real. The same remark applies to the inflamed cellular
texture, the mucous surfaces, &c. Examine a subject that has died of
angina, which during life gave the deepest red colour to the pillars of
the velum pendulum pelati, to the velum itself and the whole pharynx;
after death, the parts assume nearly their natural colour.

I would observe that in this respect it is necessary to distinguish
acute from chronic affections. In the chronic inflammations, for
example, of the pleura, of the peritoneum, &c. the redness continues
after death, because the blood is combined, as it were, with the organ;
it makes a part of it, as it makes a part of the muscles in a natural
state. So the chronic affections of the skin, of the mucous surfaces,
retain after death nearly the same blood, that they had during
life; whereas in acute affections, the blood retained for a time by
irritation, escapes when life has ceased, upon which this irritation
depended. These principles can be applied to many diseases; I repeat
it, they are of great importance in examining bodies. The neglect of
them has often led me into an error, upon the degree and even the
existence of acute inflammations, of which the organs that I examined
had been the seat.

 V. _How, notwithstanding the general communication of the Capillary
 System, the Blood and the Fluids differing from it, remain separate._

Since in the dead body, and consequently during life, there is in
the capillary system no organic obstacle to the communication of the
fluids through its small branches; since the general net-work that
these vessels form is everywhere free, how does it happen that the
blood does not pass into the part destined to the white fluids? how
is it that these do not enter where the blood is to circulate? Why
does not this fluid go out by the exhalants and the excretories, since
these tubes communicate with the arteries by the anastomoses of the
capillary system? This depends wholly upon the relation which exists
between the organic sensibility of each part of the capillary system,
and the fluid that it contains. That which carries the blood, finds in
all the other fluids irritants that make it contract at their approach;
and reciprocally, where the other fluids belong, the blood would be a
foreign fluid. Why does the trachea admit air, and reject every other
fluid? Why do the lacteals choose only chyle from the contents of the
intestines? Why does the skin absorb certain substances, and repel
others, &c.? It all depends upon this, that each part, each portion of
an organ, every organic particle, has its own sensibility, which is in
relation only with one substance, and repels others.

But as this kind of sensibility is remarkably subject to vary, its
relation to substances foreign to the organ changes also; thus the part
of the capillary system which rejected blood, admits it at the moment
when its sensibility has been increased. Irritate a part of the skin,
it reddens in an instant; the blood flows there; while the irritation
continues, it remains; when it ceases, it disappears. Whatever be the
external means which raise the cutaneous or mucous sensibility, we
observe the same phenomenon. We can in this way bring more or less
blood into some parts of the capillary system. Bring the hand to the
fire, the heat exalts the sensibility of its system, more blood enters
it; take it away, this property resumes its natural type, and the blood
is brought back to its ordinary quantity. The internal organs which
are subjected less to the causes of excitement, have less varieties in
their capillary system; yet, however, there are many, and all arise
from the same principle.

A series of organized tubes are unlike an assemblage of inert ones.
These last require mechanical obstacles to prevent the communication
of fluids with each other; where there is a communication between the
tubes, there is a communication in the fluids. On the contrary, in the
living economy, it is the peculiar vitality with which each tube is
animated, which serves for an obstacle and a limit to the different
fluids; this vitality performs the part of different machines that we
place in the communicating tubes, to separate them from each other.
Every organized vessel is then truly active; it admits or rejects
fluids which enter there, according as it is able or not to support
their presence. Disproportion of capacity has nothing to do with this
phenomenon; a vessel may have mere than four times the capacity of
the particles of a fluid, and yet refuse to admit them, if this fluid
is repugnant to its sensibility. It is in this point of view that the
theory of Boerhaave has a great defect.

At the period in which this physician wrote, the vital forces had not
been analyzed. It was necessary to employ physical forces to explain
vital phenomena; hence it is not astonishing that all his theories
are so incoherent. In fact, theories in the vital phenomena borrowed
from physical forces, exhibit the same inadequacy, as those would in
the physical phenomena borrowed from vital laws. What would you say,
if in explaining the motion of the planets, rivers, &c. they should
talk of irritability and sensibility? you would think it absurd; it is
equally absurd, in explaining the animal functions, to talk of gravity,
impulse, inequality of the capacity of the tubes, &c.

Observe, that the physical sciences made no progress until they
analyzed the simple laws that preside over their innumerable phenomena.
Observe also, that medical and physiological science was not accurately
explained, until the vital laws were analyzed, and it was shown
that they were everywhere the principles of the phenomena. See with
what ease all those of the secretions, exhalations, absorptions,
inflammation, capillary circulation, &c. are referred to the same
principles, flow from the same data, by deriving them all from their
real cause, the different modifications of the sensibility of the
organs which execute them. On the contrary, see how each presented a
new difficulty, when the mechanical causes were employed to explain
them.

From what has been said, it is then evident, that in the innumerable
variations of which the fluids of the capillary system are susceptible,
in the different portions of the system which they fill, there is
always antecedent variations in the sensibility of the vascular
parietes; these varieties produce the first.

It is especially in the capillary system and its circulation, that the
variations of the organic sensibility of the vessels produce varieties
in the course of the fluids; for as I have observed, in the great
arterial and venous trunks, in the heart, &c. the fluids are in too
large masses, and they are agitated by too strong a motion, to be thus
immediately subjected to the influence of the vascular parietes. Thus
when nature wishes to prevent the fluids from communicating in the
trunks, it places among them valves, or other analogous obstacles,
which become useless in the capillary system.

Though the anatomical arrangement be the same in the living and the
dead body, there is then a very great difference in the course through
the capillary system, in one and the other. Push, into the aorta of
an animal in whom you destroy life by opening this artery to fix in
it a syringe, different fine fluids; you will never see them fill the
capillary system, pour out by the exhalants, the excretories, &c. as
when the subject has been some hours deprived of life. The organic
sensibility inherent in the parts repels the injection; it can only
circulate in the great trunks, in which there is a large space. I
have injected, with other views, a great number of times, fluids by
the arteries and the veins; now, the capillary system is never filled
with these fluids; they circulate only in the great vessels, when the
animal can bear them. Mr. Buniva has also made comparative experiments
with injections upon living animals and those deprived of life; he has
experienced in the first a resistance which he has not found in the
other; now this resistance is in the capillary system, whose vessels
refuse to admit a fluid to which their organic sensibility is not
accommodated.


VI. _Consequences of the preceding principles, in relation to
Inflammation._

From what has been said thus far, it is easy, I think, to understand
what takes place in the inflammatory phenomena, considered in general.

If a part be irritated in any manner, immediately its organic
sensibility is altered, and increased. Without previous connexion with
the blood, the capillary system is then placed in relation with it; it
as it were calls it there; it flows there and remains accumulated until
the organic sensibility returns to its natural type.

The entrance of the blood into the capillary system is then a secondary
effect of inflammation. The principal phenomenon, that which is the
cause of all the others, is the local irritation which has changed
the organic sensibility; now this local irritation may be produced in
different ways; 1st, by an irritant immediately applied, as a straw
upon the conjunctiva, cantharides upon the skin, acrid vapours upon
the mucous surface of the bronchia or the nasal cavities, atmospheric
air upon any internal organ laid bare, as we see in wounds, &c.; 2d,
by continuity of organs, as when a part of the skin, of the pleura,
&c. being inflamed, those that are near it are also affected, and the
blood flows there, as when one organ is diseased, that which is near it
becomes so by the cellular communications; 3d, by sympathies; thus the
skin being seized with cold, the pleura is sympathetically affected;
its organic sensibility is increased, the blood immediately enters it
from every part. When this property is raised in one of these three
ways in the capillary system, the phenomena that result from it are the
same. For example, when in the pleura it is raised because the air is
in contact with this membrane, because the lungs that it covers have
been first affected, or because coin has seized upon the skin in sweat,
the effect is nearly analogous, as it respects the entrance of the
blood in the capillary system.

It is then the change that takes place in the organic sensibility, that
constitutes the essence and the principle of the disease; it is this
change which makes a pain more or less severe soon felt in the part;
then the sensibility that was organic, becomes animal. The part was
before sensible to the impression of the blood, but did not transmit
this impression to the brain; then it transmits it, and this impression
becomes painful. Irritate the healthy pleura in a living animal; it
does not suffer; irritate it on the contrary during inflammation, and
it gives signs of the most acute pain. Who does not know that most
often and almost always, a pain more or less acute is perceived in the
part, some time before it becomes red? Now this pain is the indication
of the alteration that the organic sensibility undergoes; this
alteration exists some time, often without producing an effect; this
effect, which is especially the afflux of blood, is subsequent.

It is the same of heat. I shall say hereafter how it is produced. It is
sufficient now to show that it is, like the passage of the blood in the
capillary system, only an effect of the change that has taken place in
the organic sensibility of the part; now this is evident, since it is
always consequent upon this change.

There happens then in inflammation exactly the reverse of what
Boerhaave thought. The blood accumulated according to him, in the
capillary vessels, and pushed _à tergo_ by the heart, as he termed it,
was truly the immediate cause of the affection, whereas, from what I
have said, it is only the effect.

If we reflect a little upon the innumerable varieties of the causes
which can alter the organic sensibility of the capillary system, it
will be easy to understand of what infinite varieties inflammation
is susceptible, from the momentary blush that comes and goes in the
cheeks, to the most serious phlegmon and erysipelas. We might make a
scale of the degrees of inflammation. By taking the cutaneous, for
example, we should see at the bottom the redness that arises and
disappears suddenly by the least external excitement upon the dermoid
system, which we can produce at will, and in which there is only an
afflux of blood; then those that are a little more intense, which
occasion cutaneous efflorescences of some hours, but without fever;
then those that continue for a day, with which there is some fever;
then erysipelas of the first order; then that which is more intense,
and which gangrene soon terminates. All these different degrees do
not suppose a different nature in the disease; the principle of them
is always the same; there is always, 1st, an antecedent increase of
organic sensibility, or alteration of this property; 2d, afflux of
the blood only if the increase is not great, afflux of the blood,
heat, pulsation, &c. if it is. As to fever, it is a phenomenon common
to every severe, acute local affection; it appears to depend on the
singular relation which connects the heart with all parts; it has
nothing peculiar in inflammation, but the particular modification it
receives from it.

The afflux of the blood in an irritated part takes place in
inflammation, as in an incision. In this the divided point has been
irritated by the instrument; soon the whole blood in the neighbourhood
flows there and escapes by the wound. This afflux is so evident a
result of irritation, that in a slight incision, the blood scarcely
flows at the instant of the division of the integuments, because there
is but little of this fluid at the divided place; but a moment after,
the irritation which has been felt, produces its effect, and it flows
in a quantity disproportioned to the incision.

When the alteration of the organic sensibility which produces
inflammation, has no varieties except in its intensity, the
inflammation itself differs only in degree. But the nature of the
alteration is oftentimes different; a feeble character is frequently
united with it; the part has then less redness, heat, &c. Other
modifications are also observed; now all these depend upon the
difference of the alterations that the organic sensibility experiences;
at least these alterations always precede them.

The influence of these alterations is not less evident when
inflammation terminates, than when it begins. If the organic
sensibility has been so raised, that it is as it were exhausted,
then the solid dies, and the fluid, which is no longer in a living
organ, soon becomes putrid. Examine the phenomena of every gangrene;
putrefaction is certainly only a consequence; there is always, 1st,
a desertion of the solids by the vital forces; 2d, putrefaction of
the fluids. The first is never a consequence of the second. When the
organic sensibility begins to diminish, the blood brought there by
inflammation is already susceptible of putrefaction; but the defect of
tone in the solid always precedes. There is this local phenomenon, as
well as the general, in putrid fever. It is incontestable that in this
fever, the blood has a tendency to be decomposed, to become putrid; I
will say further, that it often exhibits a commencing putrefaction.
The index of the alteration of this fluid is always the general state
of the forces of the solids; these have first lost their spring;
the symptoms of weakness are evident before those of putridity. All
the animal fluids tend naturally to putrefaction, which takes place
inevitably when life abandons the solids in which they circulate. In
proportion as the forces diminish in the solids, this tendency is
manifested. A commencement of putrefaction in the fluids during life,
is not a general phenomenon more improbable than the local phenomenon
of which we have spoken, viz. that the blood of an inflamed part
begins to putrefy and the part consequently becomes fetid, before the
organic sensibility has entirely abandoned the solid. It is only when
this ceases, that this putrefaction becomes complete; but then it is
extremely rapid, because it had commenced during life. So bodies that
have died of putrid fevers decompose with a rapidity far surpassing
those that have died of other diseases, because putrefaction had really
commenced before death.

Inflammation with a livid colour, small degree of heat, prostration of
the forces in the part, and termination by gangrene, is evidently to
well marked adynamic fever, what phlegmon is to inflammatory fever,
what irritation of the primæ viæ, which is called bilious affection,
is to the meningo-gastric fever, &c. I think if we examine attentively
local affections and general fevers, we shall always find a particular
kind of fever corresponding in its nature to a particular kind of local
affection. But let us return to inflammation.

If it terminates by suppuration, it is evident that there is a new
alteration of the organic sensibility to produce pus. The same thing
in scirrhus. The termination by resolution takes place when this
sensibility returns to its natural type. Examine well the inflammatory
phenomena in their succession; you will see, that always a particular
state in this property, precedes the changes they exhibit.

When our medicaments are applied upon an inflamed part, it is not upon
the blood that they act; it is not by lessening the heat, or relaxing.
The expressions _to soften_, _unbend_ and _relax_ the solids, are
inaccurate, because they are borrowed from physical phenomena. We
relax, we soften dry leather by moistening it; but we only act upon
the living organs, by modifying their vital properties. Observe that
though we already begin to recognize the empire of these properties in
diseases, medical language is still wholly borrowed from theories which
employ physical principles in the explanation of morbid phenomena. We
have arrived at a period when the manner of expressing ourselves upon
these phenomena should be changed; I do not here speak of the names of
diseases. Certainly every emollient, astringent, discutient, relaxing,
tonic, medicament, &c. employed with different views upon an inflamed
part, only acts by modifying differently from what it was, organic
sensibility. It is thus that our medicaments cure or often aggravate
diseases.

From what has been said, it is evident that the solids perform the
first part in inflammations, and the fluids only the second. Modern
authors have perceived this truth, and they have immediately assigned
an important part, in this respect, to the nerves; but we have seen
that these appear foreign to organic sensibility, that they are so
even after the most rigorous observation. The nervous influence, that
at least which we know in other parts, is, in inflammation, as in
secretion, exhalation and nutrition, almost entirely wanting. There is
in this affection, unalteration of the organic sensibility, and this is
every thing.

The kind of blood varies in inflammation, and in this respect, I
think the following rule is generally uniform; whenever the organic
sensibility is much raised, the life augmented and there is an increase
of forces in the inflamed part, then it is the red blood that remains
in the capillary system; then there is always great heat there. On
the contrary, when the inflammation approaches the putrid character,
the part becomes of a dull and livid colour; the capillaries appear
to be filled with black blood; the heat is less. In general, a bright
colour, in all eruptions analogous to inflammatory tumours, announces
the increase of the organic sensibility. A livid colour, on the other
hand, indicates its prostration; petechiæ are livid; scorbutic blotches
are so; a livid colour in tumours is the forerunner of gangrene. Do you
wish to know when cold acts as a stimulant? It is when it reddens the
end of the nose, the ears, &c. When these parts become livid, other
phenomena announce at the same time, that its action is sedative. This
is supported by my experiments upon life and death, which have proved
that the black blood everywhere interrupts the functions, weakens,
annihilates even the motion of the parts, when it is brought to them by
the arteries.


_Differences of Inflammation, according to the different Systems._

From what has been said upon inflammation, it appears that it has for
its seat the capillary system, for its principle an alteration in
the organic sensibility of this system, for its effect the afflux of
blood into vessels in which it did not before circulate, a consequent
increase of caloric, &c. Now where the capillary system is more
developed, where the organic sensibility is greater, inflammation
ought to be more frequent; and this is the case. It is especially in
the cellular, serous, mucous and dermoid systems that we observe it;
fine injections demonstrate in these systems a capillary net-work
infinitely superior to that of the others. Besides, as if there is not
only nutrition, but also exhalation and oftentimes secretion in these
systems, there must be more organic sensibility, a property from which
all these functions are derived.

On the contrary, inflammation is rare in the muscular, osseous,
cartilaginous, fibrous, arterial, venous systems, &c. where there are
but few capillaries, and where the organic sensibility presiding only
over nutrition, is necessarily found in a less degree.

Besides, as the capillaries make an integral part of the system where
they are found, and as each system has its peculiar kind of organic
sensibility, it is evident that they ought to partake of this kind; now
as it is upon this property that all the inflammatory phenomena depend,
they ought to present an aspect wholly different in each system. This
is what we shall be convinced is the case by an examination of each. I
shall only present here generally, that essential point of view, upon
which authors have not insisted.

Let us take first the systems most exposed to inflammation; we shall
see that phlegmon is the inflammatory kind of the cellular, erysipelas
that of the dermoid, and catarrh that of the mucous. We have not yet a
general name to express that of the serous; but who does not know how
it differs from the others?

In the systems rarely subject to inflammation, we know this affection
infinitely less than in the preceding; but there is no doubt that
it differs essentially. Compare the length and permanency of that of
the bones, with the rapidity and disposition to change of that of the
muscles, or rather of the fibrous bodies, in rheumatism.

The results of inflammation do not vary less than its nature; if
resolution does not take place, each has its own mode of suppuration.
Compare the pus of erysipelas, that of phlegmon, the milky or
flocculent fluid of the serous membranes, the whitish or greyish
humour, of a mucous consistence, that escapes from the membranes of
the same name after catarrh, the blackish sanies of the bones in
suppuration, &c. We shall see that some organs, as the fibrous bodies,
do not suppurate.

Gangrene once taken place, is everywhere the same, since it is only
the absence of life, and all dead organs have the same properties. But
according to the sum of organic sensibility which each system has, it
is more or less disposed to die after inflammation, in the midst of
others which retain their life. Who does not know that the carbuncle
which soon kills the part it seizes, only attacks certain systems; that
the osseous, the cartilaginous, the nervous, &c. are always exempt from
it?

The essential fault of every medical doctrine is that of considering
diseases too abstractedly; they are so modified in each system, that
their aspect is wholly different. If I may be allowed the expression,
it is always the same individual, but in entering each system, it has a
different appearance there, so that often you cannot recognize it. When
will medicine be so far advanced that the treatment will correspond
with these varieties? There should certainly be a general treatment of
inflammation; but it should be modified differently, according as we
apply it to phlegmon, erysipelas, catarrh, &c.

This then is a very evident proof of that peculiar character which
inflammation takes in each part. We know with what ease and rapidity
the blood flows to any part of the skin in consequence of irritation
there; prick or rub briskly a part of this organ, it reddens in a
moment. This takes place also, though less sensibly, on the mucous
surfaces. This is not equally seen upon the serous; I have frequently
ascertained this on living animals, when I have laid bare these
surfaces and irritated them in different ways. The afflux of the blood
does not immediately follow the irritation: there is always an interval
between one and the other, never less than an hour.


VII. _Structure, and Properties of the Capillaries._

What is the structure of the capillaries? So great is their tenuity
that we evidently cannot have upon this point, any kind of data founded
upon experiment and observation. Only it is very probable, it is even
certain, that this structure is modified differently in each organ,
that it is not the same in the tendons, the aponeuroses, the muscles,
&c. that it really partakes of the nature of the organ of which it
makes an integral part.

The membrane which lines the excretories, the arteries, the veins,
the exhalants, vessels which go into the system of the capillaries or
come out of it, is very like that of these capillaries; but it is not
certainly the same.

It is the diversity in the structure of the capillaries, according to
the organs in which they are found, which has an essential influence
upon the difference which the vital properties exhibit, particularly
the organic sensibility and the insensible organic contractility in
each system in which we examine them; hence peculiar modifications in
all those diseases over which these properties preside, and which are
seated especially in the capillaries, such as inflammations, tumours,
hemorrhages, &c. &c.

The difference in structure of the capillary system, sometimes becomes
manifest to the eye. Thus the spleen, the corpus cavernosum, instead of
presenting, like the serous surfaces, a vascular net-work in which the
blood oscillates in different directions, according to the motion it
receives, exhibit only spongy, cancellated textures, whose nature is
but little known, in which the blood appears often to stagnate, instead
of moving, &c.


VIII. _Of the Circulation of the Capillaries._

The circulatory phenomena are of two kinds in the capillary system:
1st, there is the motion of the fluids; 2d, the alterations which they
undergo.


_Motion of the Fluids in the Capillary System._

These fluids are, 1st, the blood; 2d, others differing from it in their
composition, though we only know their differences of appearance. Let
us examine the laws of the motion of each kind.

The blood, after it has entered the capillary system, is evidently
beyond the influence of the heart, and only circulates by that of
the tonic forces, or the insensible contractility of the part. If we
examine the phenomena of this capillary system but little, we shall
be easily convinced of this truth, which Bordeu first taught. The
capillary system is really the boundary, beyond which the influence of
the heart does not extend. Hence why all the vessels that go out of
this system, exhibit in the fluid they contain a motion that does not
correspond with that of the arteries that go to it. 1st. After what we
have said, there is no doubt of this, as it regards the veins. 2d. It
is also true as it respects the excretories. The increase of secretions
does not correspond with the increase of the action of the heart, nor
does their diminution with the diminution of the pulsations. Who does
not know, on the contrary, that often in a violent paroxysm of fever,
in which the agitation of the arterial blood is very great, all the
glands seem to shut up their ducts and not to pour out any fluid? 3d.
It is the same with all the exhalations; it is not when a fever is the
greatest, that we sweat the most, but when it is somewhat diminished.
Hemorrhages are evidently but an exhalation; now who does not know,
that the pulse is often very weak, when the blood flows abundantly from
the mucous surfaces of the womb, the nostrils, the bronchia, &c.? Who
does not know on the contrary that in extreme agitations of the heart,
most often the blood does not flow by the exhalants? Is the quickness
of the pulse increased during menstruation? It is the redness of the
capillary system, the abundance of the blood of this system, which is
often, as I have said, the forerunner of active hemorrhages; but it
is never the increase of the action of the heart. Oftentimes fungous
tumours, soft flesh that shoots up in wounds of a bad nature, polypi,
&c. pour out blood; the heart has nothing to do with these hemorrhages,
they come evidently from the capillary system. Who does not know, that
frequently when the exhalants pour out copiously serous fluids upon the
membrane of that name, in the production of dropsies, the heart is,
like all the other parts, in a state of real inertia?

Since then all the vessels going from the capillary system exhibit in
their motions no sort of harmony with those of the heart, it is evident
that the influence of this organ is interrupted, is terminated at the
capillary system.

Observe nutrition; it is clearly the capillary system that distributes
everywhere the materials that it has received by the impulse of the
heart; now the influence of this does not extend to the place where the
nutritive matter is deposited. In fact, its impulse everywhere equal
and uniform, pushes the blood with nearly an equal force to all parts,
with some exceptions in the fœtus. Now nutrition is on the contrary
extremely unequal; at one age, it is one part that takes more increase,
consequently receives more nutritive matter; at another age, it is
another organ. This inequality, is the first and principal phenomenon
of growth.

How can we reconcile with the sole and uniform impulse of the heart
in all parts, inflammation, the production of herpes, of different
eruptions, &c. which appear in some places? Would inflammation exhibit
so many aspects, according to the system it seizes, if the heart alone
presided over its development? All the difference between catarrh,
erysipelas, phlegmon, &c. would disappear; and there would be only what
arose from being nearer, or further from the heart.

Let us cease then to consider this organ as the sole agent which
presides over the motion of the great vessels and the small, which,
in these last, driving the blood abundantly to a part, produces there
inflammation, which by its impulse causes the different cutaneous
eruptions, secretions, exhalations, &c. The whole doctrine of the
mechanicians rested, as we know, upon the great extent which they gave
to the movements of the heart.

There are evidently two kinds of diseases in relation to the
circulation; 1st, those that affect the general; 2d, those that affect
the capillary circulation. Different fevers form especially the first
kind. Different eruptions, tumours, inflammations, &c. produce the
second; now, though many relations connect the second with the first,
it is not essentially dependant upon it; the following is the proof of
this; fevers can evidently only exist in animals with great vessels,
in those in which the fluids move in a mass; they cannot take place
in zoophytes and plants, which have only a capillary circulation;
yet these last classes of animals and all vegetables are subject to
all the affections that disturb the capillary circulation. Thus we
see upon plants many tumours; their wounds unite; two portions even
contract adhesions, as a graft proves. The diseases of their capillary
system are no doubt different from those of animals in their progress
and their nature; but they exhibit always the same general character,
because they are derived from the same properties, organic sensibility
and insensible contractility.

Since the diseases of the capillary system are not essentially
connected with those of the general vascular system, they are not
then dependant on it; the circulation of the first is but indirectly
subordinate to that of the second. Hence why the two circulations can
be separate; why more than half of the organized beings have only the
capillary. This is the most important, since it immediately pours out
the materials of nutrition, of exhalations, of absorption: thus it
exists in all organized beings. We cannot conceive of any one without
it, because we cannot conceive of any one that is not continually
composed and decomposed by nutrition.

From what we have thus far said, it is evident, that the blood after
it has arrived in the capillary system, is moved there only by the
tonic influence of the solids; now, as the least cause alters and
changes their properties, it is subject there to an infinity of
irregular motions. The least irritation makes it recede, advance,
deviate to the right, or the left, &c. In the ordinary state, it moves
generally in an uniform manner from the arteries towards the veins;
but at every instant it may find causes of irregular oscillations in
its innumerable anastomoses; hence, as we have seen, the necessity of
these anastomoses. These irregular oscillations in the motion of the
blood in the capillary system, can be seen with a microscope. Haller,
Spallanzani and others, whose experiments are too well known for me
to relate them here, saw them a hundred times. They saw the globules
advance, recede, move in many different directions in animals with
red and cold blood, when they irritated the mesentery or any other
transparent part. In animals with red and warm blood, in those even
whose mesentery is almost as transparent as that of the frog, as in the
guinea-pig, it has appeared to me infinitely more difficult to trace
the motion of the blood in the capillaries.

It is easy to see that all the phenomena of inflammation, of different
eruptions, of tumours, &c. are especially founded upon this
susceptibility of the blood, in the capillary system, to move in an
infinite variety of directions, wherever irritation calls it.

From what has been said, it is evident that there are times when the
blood passes with less rapidity through the capillary system, and
there are others, when it moves more quickly. How then is the relation
always preserved the same, between the arterial and the venous blood?
It is in this way; the irregular oscillations hardly ever take place
except in one part of the capillary system; in no case is the whole
of it affected; thus if the blood moves more slowly in the cutaneous
capillary system, its velocity is increased in the cellular, the
muscular, &c.

This is in fact an invariable law in the vital forces, that if on the
one hand they increase in energy, on the other, they diminish; we might
say, that there was only a certain quantity in the animal economy,
that this might be divided in different proportions, but it cannot be
increased or diminished. This principle results so evidently from all
the phenomena of the economy, that I think it unnecessary to support
it by numerous proofs; now, taking this as incontrovertible, it is
evident that one portion of the capillary system increasing its action,
only at the expense of the others, the sum total of blood transmitted
from the arteries to the veins remains always nearly the same. All the
systems are then, in this respect, supporters of each other; if nothing
passes by the capillaries of one, it is the same thing, provided the
capillaries of another transmit double the amount of fluid that they do
in an ordinary state.

Observe the blood in the cutaneous capillaries before the paroxysm
of intermittent fevers; it recedes from these capillaries; all the
surfaces that it reddened, become pale; the capillaries of the other
systems supply the momentary defect of the action of these. Who knows
if, in many cases where the skin becomes very red, when much blood
enters it, there is not in the other systems a paleness analogous to
that of the skin during the cold fit of fever? I not only think this
very probable, but I have no doubt of it. The external capillaries
certainly contain more blood in summer, whilst those of the internal
systems receive more in winter. There is then continual varieties in
the mode of the passage of this fluid through the general capillary
system; each system transmits by turns, more or less, according as it
is affected.

When we see the glands, frequently in a short time pour out an
enormous quantity of fluid, the serous, cutaneous, mucous exhalants,
&c. furnish also much greater proportions than in a natural state,
we are astonished that the circulation can at the same time continue
with the same regularity; we are not less so undoubtedly, when we see
on the contrary all the evacuations suppressed, and nothing goes out
from the animal solids; now in all these cases, it is the capillary
system, whose forces differently modified in the different parts,
re-establishes the general equilibrium which would inevitably be lost,
if the heart was the agent of impulse which pushed to the extremities
the secreted and exhaled fluids, and transmitted the black blood to the
veins.

Sometimes however a derangement almost universal takes place in the
capillary system, especially on the exterior; this takes place in
sudden changes of the air. Though the vital laws preside essentially
over the capillary circulation, yet the degree of pressure of the
surrounding air can modify it to a certain point; we have a proof of
this in cupping glasses, or in any other means that produce suddenly
a vacuum upon a part of the body; then the fluids pressed in the
neighbourhood by the external air, and not compressed on the contrary
at the place of the cupping glass, raise up and distend considerably
the skin. The sudden changes of the atmosphere produce upon the whole
body, though in a less degree, the effect of a cupping glass. If the
air is rarefied, the whole external capillary system is more full; even
the sub-cutaneous veins swell; a very considerable part of the blood
experiences then a derangement in its motion, between the two systems
with red and black blood. The harmony, the correspondence of these two
systems is disturbed; hence the uneasiness, the sense of weight, &c. of
which we are instantly relieved by a sudden change of the atmosphere.

The evacuation of the blood also establishes differences, though less,
in the capillary system. Bleeding is of two kinds; one lessens the
blood of the circulation of the great trunks; and then it is sometimes
red, as in arteriotomy; but most often it is the black, that is drawn
off; the other takes blood from the capillary circulation; this is
done by leeches, cupping, &c. Each produces a different change in the
course of the blood. Physicians formerly were desirous of knowing from
which vein they ought to bleed. I think it is much more important to
know when we should by bleeding, act upon the general circulation, and
when upon the capillary. In many local congestions, I do not think
that you can diminish the quantity of blood in a part of the capillary
system, by diminishing the mass of this fluid in the great trunks; you
might take a quarter at least of the blood that there then was in the
economy, if the part is irritated, the blood will still flow as much to
this part. On the contrary, you may double by transfusion, the mass of
this fluid in an animal, local inflammations will not arise, because
there must be a preliminary irritation before the blood flows towards,
and enters a particular part of the capillary system.

The fluids differing from the blood which circulate in the capillary
system, 1st. are evidently like it beyond the influence of the heart.
2d. The influence of the tonic powers presides over their motions. 3d.
They are consequently subject to irregular oscillations, according as
the capillaries are differently affected.

We know not the nature of most of these fluids, because they cannot
be subjected to our experiments. They are those that enter the
ligaments, the tendons, the aponeuroses, the hair, the cartilages, the
fibro-cartilages, a part of the cutaneous, mucous, serous surfaces,
&c. They communicate with the blood from which they arise, by the
capillary systems, they afterwards move in their own systems. In most
of the organs in which they exist alone, as in those called white,
they are very slow in their motion, because the sensibility of these
organs is obscure and dull. Thus different tumours, to the formation of
which they contribute, have, as we shall see, almost always a chronic
progress.

There are often in the animal economy those tumours, that are commonly
called lymphatic, though we are wholly ignorant of the fluids that
form them. They are found especially in the neighbourhood of the
articulations; but sometimes only the cartilages, the cellular texture,
the bones, &c. are the seat of these white tumours; it is important
to ascertain the characters that distinguish them from the tumours in
which the blood especially enters.


_Phenomena of the Alteration of the Fluids in the Capillary System._

We have just treated of the phenomena of the motion of the fluids in
the general capillary system; let us now speak of the changes which
they undergo there in their nature.

The blood exhibits a remarkable phenomenon in the general capillary
system; from red, which it was in the arteries, it becomes black. How
does this take place? It evidently can happen only in two ways, viz.
either by the addition or subtraction of some principles. Is it charged
with carbon and hydrogen? Does it deposit only oxygen in the organs?
Are these two causes united to give it its blackness? I think that it
will always be difficult to decide upon these questions, which do not
appear to me to be capable of any positive experiment. However, when
we see the arterial blood furnish all the organs with the materials of
their secretion, nutrition and exhalation, it is to be presumed that it
leaves in these organs, rather than takes from them, the principle of
its colour.

Sometimes the red blood passes through the capillary system, without
losing its colour; for example, when the blood has flowed for a long
time black from a vein, we sometimes see it come out red, or nearly so,
just before it ceases to flow. In opening the renal vein, I have two or
three times made this observation, which has, I think, been noticed by
some authors.

The blood becomes more or less black in the general capillary system.
If you have observed bleedings, you have undoubtedly seen in diseases
innumerable varieties in the colour of the blood that comes from
the vein. Has this fluid a different blackness in each part of the
capillary system? It has appeared to me that the difference is not
very great in this respect. I have frequently had occasion to open the
renal, saphena, jugular veins, &c. the blood has appeared to me to be
everywhere of nearly the same colour. I wished to see if the blood
returning from an inflamed part was more or less black; I made then
in the hind leg of a dog a number of wounds near each other, and left
them open to the air. At the end of three days, when the inflammation
appeared to be greatest, I opened high up on the diseased and the sound
limb, the saphena and the crural veins, in order to examine their blood
comparatively; I could discover no sensible difference. I bled a man
who had a whitlow with an inflammatory swelling of the whole hand,
and the inferior part of the fore arm; the blood appeared of the same
colour as usual. Yet, as the veins bring also the blood of parts not
inflamed, more minute researches must be made.

An object which deserves to be determined with precision, is this, viz.
the cases in which, in general diseases, there is an alteration in the
deep colour of the blood, and the symptoms which correspond with these
alterations. At present we only know that it is more deep coloured in
some cases and less so in others.


IX. _Of the Capillaries considered as the seat of the production of
Heat._

Every one knows the innumerable hypotheses that were made upon the
production of animal heat by the mechanical physicians. Modern
chemists, in showing the insufficiency of these theories, have
substituted one that has not less difficulties. The lungs are
considered by them as the place in which the caloric is extricated,
and the arteries, a kind of tubes, that carry the heat to all parts of
the body. The production of this great phenomenon belongs then wholly,
according to them, to the pulmonary capillary system. I believe, on the
contrary, and I have taught in my courses on physiology, that it is in
the general capillary system that it has its seat.

I shall not stop to refute the hypothesis of the chemists. When we
place on one side, all the phenomena of animal heat, and on the other,
this hypothesis, it appears so inadequate to their explanation, that
I think every methodical mind can do it without my assistance. These
phenomena are the following:

1st. Every living and organized being, both animal and vegetable, has
a temperature of its own. 2d. This temperature is nearly the same
in all ages in animals. 3d. It is entirely independent of that of
the atmosphere; it remains the same in a warm as in a colder medium.
4th. Caloric is often disengaged in health more abundantly in some
parts than in others. 5th. In inflammation there is evidently a more
considerable extrication of it. 6th. The vital forces, especially the
tonic power, have a very decided influence upon the extrication of
caloric. 7th. Each organ has its own temperature, and it is from all
these partial temperatures, that the general one arises. 8th. There
is oftentimes an immediate connexion between the respiratory and
circulatory phenomena, and those of the production of heat; the first
increasing, the second increase also in proportion. At other times this
relation does not exist.

If, below these phenomena, you place the theory of Lavoisier, Crawford,
&c. I do not believe you can make it accord with them, and conceive how
caloric, disengaged in the pulmonary capillary system can be spread,
as they say, through the whole animal economy. By admitting on the
contrary that this fluid is disengaged in the general capillary system,
it is easily understood. But let us explain this way of understanding
the production of animal heat.

The blood draws from two principal sources the substances that repair
the losses it has sustained. These sources are, 1st, digestion; 2d,
respiration; the first pours chyle into the blood, the other mixes
it with different aerial principles. Sometimes cutaneous absorption
introduces into it different substances. The mixture of the blood with
the new substances it receives, constitutes sanguification. Now these
new substances carry continually into this fluid, new caloric; for as
all bodies are penetrated by it, there can hardly be an addition of
a substance to the blood, without the addition of this principle. In
sanguification, caloric combines then with the blood, but it is not in
a free state; it becomes part of the fluid; it is one of its elements.

Thus charged with combined caloric, the blood arrives in the capillary
system; there it gives it out, wherever it undergoes changes. It is
in fact in this system that it is changed into nutritive substance,
into that of the secretions, exhalations, &c. All the functions in
which this fluid changes its nature, in which certain principles are
separated from it, to form certain substances destined especially
to particular uses, necessarily disengage its caloric. I cannot
say precisely how this happens, whether it is more in the internal
alterations that the blood undergoes in furnishing nutrition, or in
those destined to furnish secretion or exhalation. This only is the
general principle, and exhibits three things; 1st, the entrance of
caloric into the blood, with all the substances that repair its losses;
2d, the circulation in a combined state of the caloric newly entered;
3d, extrication of this combined fluid, to form free caloric by the
changes and different alterations that the blood undergoes in the
general capillary system, in forming the materials of the different
functions.

The extrication of caloric is, then, a phenomenon exactly analogous to
those of which the general capillary system is the seat. In nutrition,
in fact, there is, 1st, a combination of new foreign substances with
the blood; 2d, circulation in the great vessels of these substances
combined; 3d, separation of the nutritive substance to enter the
organs. So also the elements of the secreted fluids combine, then
circulate combined, then leave the blood to be thrown out. So, in fine,
every exhaled fluid combines, circulates, and is then separated from
the blood.

From this it is evident that, 1st, the entrance of foreign substances
into the blood by respiration, by digestion or even cutaneous
absorption; 2d, the combination of these substances with the blood
in sanguification; 3d, their circulation in the arterial system, are
three general phenomena common to secretions, exhalations, nutrition,
and calorification, if I may be allowed the term; for the production
of heat is a function and not a property; hence why I think the word
caloricity does not express it.

The caloric arrives, then, in the capillary system combined with the
matter of secretions, exhalations, and nutrition. The blood is the
common fluid that results from all these combinations. In the general
capillary system each part is separated; the caloric to be distributed
over the whole body and afterwards pass out; the fluids of the
secretions go out by the glands; those of exhalations escape from their
respective surfaces; those of nutrition remain in the organs.

It seems to me, that the explanation which exhibits nature always
pursuing an uniform course in her operations, drawing the same results
from the same principles, has a greater degree of probability than that
which shows her separating, as it were, this phenomenon from all the
others, in the way which she produces it.

The manner in which caloric enters the body, is of no consequence.
Vegetables that have no lungs, but only air tubes and absorbents,
and fishes that have branchiæ, have an independent temperature. That
heat may be produced, it is sufficient that foreign substances are
continually assimilated to the fluids of organized bodies, and that
after this assimilation, these fluids, whether they are blood, as in
animals with red blood, either warm or cold, or whether they are of a
different nature, as in those with white fluids and in plants, it is
sufficient, I say, that the fluids undergo different transformations in
the capillary system.

Respiration combines more caloric with the blood; there is consequently
a greater disengagement of this principle in animals who breathe by
lungs, than in others; and even in the first, the greater the lungs,
the greater is the quantity of caloric disengaged; as is proved by
comparing birds, quadrupeds, the cetaceous tribe among fishes, &c.
But these varieties are certainly only in relation to the degree of
temperature; hence there are animals with cold blood, and those with
warm. The general phenomena of the disengagement of heat remain always
the same in animals with lungs, in those without them, and in plants.

From these principles, it is easy to understand most of the phenomena
of animal heat.

The disengagement of caloric is always subordinate to the state of
the vital forces. As the tone of a part is greater or less, it is
more or less warm. This dependance of the heat upon the state of the
forces of the part, is a fact, that is proved by all diseases and
all the phenomena of health; it is as true with regard to heat, as
it is with regard to the exhalations and the secretions. The greater
afflux of blood to an inflamed part and the greater disengagement of
caloric, the increase of this disengagement in the womb and the nose,
and menstruation and the active nasal hemorrhages, &c. the heat of
the chest and active pulmonary hemorrhages, &c. are the effects of
the same cause, viz. the increase of the vital forces of the part. In
general, whenever the tone is much increased, the heat increases also;
hence why there is a greater disengagement of it in almost all active
sweats, hemorrhages, and even secretions; whilst this fluid is not
superabundant in sweats, hemorrhages, or secretions that are called
passive, whatever may be the quantity of fluid separated from the blood
by them.

Each system has its own degree of heat. There is certainly less caloric
given off in the hair, the nails, and the epidermis, than in the
other systems. The white organs, as the tendons, the aponeuroses, the
ligaments, the cartilages, &c. have probably less than the muscles.
Examine the claws of birds, in which there are only these white parts;
they are not so warm as the rest of the body.

The difference of the heat of each system situated in the interior
has not yet been analyzed; I am persuaded that if it was done with
precision, by insulating those which can be, so that they might
communicate by the vessels, we should observe that each separates a
different quantity of caloric, and that consequently there are as
many distinct temperatures in the general temperature, as there are
organized systems.

I am convinced that the ligaments, the cartilages, &c. approximate in
this respect the organs of animals with cold blood, and that if man
was composed of organs analogous to those, his temperature would be
much inferior to what it naturally is. The systems which disengage more
caloric communicate it to those that disengage less. If the hair was in
the middle of the body, it would be as warm as the neighbouring parts,
though its temperature would be independent; it is now always inferior
to that of the body, because it is insulated. Each system has then its
peculiar mode of heat, as each has its peculiar mode of secretion, each
exhalant surface its peculiar mode of exhalation, each texture its
peculiar mode of nutrition; and all this depends immediately on the
modifications that the vital properties have in each part.

It is in consequence of this peculiarity of heat in each system, that
each gives a different sensation in inflammation. Compare the sharp and
biting heat of erysipelas with that of phlegmon; certain dull, obscure
heats, the forerunners of organic affections, with the acute heats
of different inflammations; apply the hand to the skin in different
fevers, you will see that each is almost marked by a particular kind of
heat. Animal bodies alone exhibit these varieties of nature in heat;
minerals have only varieties in degree.

We understand from the principles explained above, not only the
local alterations of heat, but also the general derangement that
takes place in its disengagement, from the effect of diseases,
whether this disengagement is increased, diminished, or affected with
irregularities, as in certain ataxic fevers, in phthisis, when the
palms of the hands and the face are warmer in some cases, &c. Who does
not know that oftentimes when the extremities are frozen, the patient
feels an extraordinary internal heat? It is sufficient that the forces
of the capillary system be differently modified, that the heat may be
so also.

Observe, in fact, that the alterations of heat in diseases are as
frequent as those of the exhalations and secretions, and that they
always present, like the first, a previous derangement in the vital
forces. If chemists apply their theories to these morbid changes of
heat, instead of considering them as a necessary consequence of the
state in which the vital forces are then found, they will necessarily
find in them an insurmountable obstacle.

When we run swiftly, when the blood is violently agitated in the
paroxysm of fever, more caloric is disengaged than at any other time.
Does this prove that it is the general circulation which contributes
to the disengagement of caloric, and that it takes place in the great
vessels? No more than a copious sweat proves that the heart drives it
out. Strongly excited by the shock of the red blood which is suddenly
increased, the capillary and exhalant systems are compelled to
increase their action; now a double effect is the result; 1st, greater
disengagement of caloric; 2d, increased exhalation.

If the heat is increased when respiration is hurried, it appears to
depend only on this, that the latter is hardly ever accelerated,
without the circulation being so too. This is so true, that if you make
for a long time rapidly successive inspirations and expirations, the
heat will not increase. Besides, why should the heat actually increase
by the hurry of respiration? Undoubtedly because more air entering in
a given time, the lungs would absorb more oxygen, and consequently,
according to the opinions of the chemists, more caloric would be
disengaged. But let them present more or less of this principle to the
blood, it absorbs the same quantity. In ordinary inspiration the air
contains much more than can pass into this fluid. When an animal is
made to breathe it pure, the blood does not become more red, because
the same quantity always enters it. So you may in vain put into the
alimentary passages four times more nutritive substance than common, no
more chyle will be formed, the lacteals will absorb no more; there will
only be more excrements, or vomiting will take place.

The state of respiration has no influence then upon the actual heat of
the body; it only contributes to it by constantly introducing a greater
or less quantity of combined caloric. It is thus that animals which
respire the most, have habitually the most caloric.

How can an animal, breathing a very cold air, eating aliments almost
deprived of caloric, &c. in northern latitudes, have as much heat as in
hot climates? It is not the free caloric contained in the parts, but
the combined, which, being introduced into the blood with the foreign
substances, furnishes the materials of that which is disengaged in
the general capillary system. Now the combined caloric is absolutely
independent of temperature. As much fire is elicited from the same
stone by the steel, in the coldest as in the warmest countries.

All the caloric that is combined with the red blood is not disengaged
whilst this fluid is passing through the general capillary system;
there remains some of it still combined with the black blood. Hence
why in the first moments of asphyxia, before death has taken place,
though in consequence of the interruption of respiration, all the
blood that comes through the arteries to the capillaries is black, the
heat continues to be generated for some time. When the contact of the
black blood has even interrupted all the great functions, those of the
brain, of the muscles, the heart, the lungs, &c. it appears that the
black blood then undergoes for some time, a kind of oscillation in the
capillary system, by which it disengages a little caloric. Hence,
why those who have died of asphyxia produced by charcoal, or hanging,
animals killed in vacuo, apoplectics, &c. preserve their heat a long
time after death, as all physicians have observed.

This phenomenon is not however peculiar to the case of which we are
treating. In opening dead bodies at the Hotel Dieu, I have observed
that the time in which they lost their animal heat was very variable;
that a body continues warm a greater or less time, especially among
those who have died suddenly of an acute affection, in the paroxysm
of an ataxic fever, for example, or by a fall, for those who die of a
chronic disease, lose almost immediately their caloric. The difference
in the first is often three, four, or even six hours. This phenomenon
arises from the fact, that whenever death is sudden it interrupts only
the great functions; the tonic action of the parts continues for a
greater or less time after. Now this action disengages a little caloric
from the blood that is in the general system. Thus in violent deaths,
absorption continues some time after death; thus the muscles still
contract; thus perhaps the glands, take up for some hours, from the
blood that remains in the capillary system, the materials proper for
their secretion.

This inequality in the heat of dead bodies can only arise from the
cause I have named; for when the disengagement of caloric has ceased in
the body, that which remains in it becomes in equilibrium with that of
the external air, according to the general laws of this equilibrium.
Now these laws being uniform, their effect would be the same in
every case. Hence then the phenomena related above, are evidently
incompatible with any other theory than that which supposes the caloric
to be disengaged in the general capillary system.

Sympathy has, as we know, the greatest influence upon heat. According
as this or that part is affected, there is disengaged in others more
or less of their fluid. An icy coldness often takes place in syncope.
Ulcerations of the lungs produce a burning in the palms of the hands.
In other affections, the head seems to be the seat of the greatest
heat. In a fever frequently the patient is hot in one place and cold in
another. How does all this happen? in this way; the affected organ acts
sympathetically on the tonic forces of the part; these being raised,
more caloric than usual is disengaged; it is precisely the same as in
sympathetic secretions or exhalations. Whether the vital forces are
raised by a stimulus directly applied, or by the sympathetic influence
they receive, the effect that results from it is exactly the same.

It is necessary to distinguish this sympathetic increase of heat, from
those that are produced by an aberration of perception, as when we
think we are very hot or cold in a part, or experience even a sensation
exactly analogous to those that are natural, though the part to which
we refer this sensation may be in its natural state, there being
neither more or less caloric disengaged in it. It is as when we think
we feel pain in the amputated extremity of a limb. It is an aberration
of perception; it is truly a sympathy of animal sensibility, whereas
the preceding is a sympathy of insensible organic contractility or
tone. It is this last property that is affected; the disengagement of
caloric is a consequence; it takes place as usual, like the perception
that indicates its presence. Another person's hand applied on the
part, feels nothing new in the first case, of which I shall say more
in the following systems; it experiences a warmer sensation in this.
So if the effect of the sympathetic influence is to diminish the tonic
forces, there will be a less local disengagement of this fluid, which
will be equally perceptible to the individual and to any other person
who applies his hand to the part. Diseases continually furnish us with
examples of these phenomena in relation to heat, and no other theory
than the one now given would be able to explain them.

There is a phenomenon that is as difficult to be well understood by
this theory as any other; it is the faculty animals have of resisting
external heat. Every inert body is of the same temperature as the
medium which surrounds it. Every organized body on the contrary repels
the caloric that tends to raise it to a higher temperature than its
own. Perhaps this belongs to the laws of the propagation of caloric, of
which we are ignorant.

It will be asked undoubtedly why in the ordinary state there is only
disengaged a certain quantity of caloric, so as to produce an uniform
temperature of a certain number of degrees of the thermometer. I answer
that it is by the same cause that in the ordinary state the pulse
beats nearly the same number of times in a minute, which makes common
respiration consist of so many elevations and depressions of the ribs,
&c. &c. It is one of those phenomena that belongs to the immutable
order first established, and which it is impossible to explain. Only
it appears that this immutable order depends upon the primitive type
that has been impressed upon the vital forces, a type, which when
nothing excites or diminishes them, produces always phenomena nearly
uniform; but as a thousand causes make them vary, a thousand times
the pulse, respiration, heat, &c. are capable of differing. I would
observe however in regard to the last, that its variations are not so
great as those of many of the other functions. Compare, for example,
the ordinary quantity of secreted and exhaled fluids, with the increase
that takes place under certain circumstances, the common state of the
pulse with its exacerbations in many fevers, &c. you will see that
between the natural and the morbid state there is often an enormous
difference. The heat on the contrary, is never raised but a few degrees
above the temperature of the body. When there appears by touching the
parts, to be a great difference, the thermometer proves that it is in
reality trifling.

I would remark, in concluding this article, that I have not sought
to ascertain how the caloric is disengaged in the capillary system,
what portion escapes, in what relation it is with the red and the
black blood, &c.; none of these can be determined by experiment. Let
us be content in our theories with establishing general principles,
especially analogies between functions that are known, and those
which we attempt to explain, let us attempt merely to offer some
general views; but let us never hazard precise explanations. Some have
endeavoured lately to determine accurately what quantity of oxygen
is absorbed, what quantity goes to produce the water of respiration,
what quantity of carbonic acid gas is formed, how much caloric is
disengaged, &c. This precision would be advantageous if it could be
attained; but no phenomenon in the living economy will admit of it, in
the explanations which it occasions. Chemists and natural philosophers
accustomed to study the phenomena over which the physical forces
preside, have carried their spirit of calculation into the theories
they have formed for those which the vital laws govern. But this should
not be so. In organized bodies, the spirit of the theories should
be wholly different from the spirit of the theories applied to the
physical sciences. It is necessary in these last that every phenomenon
should be accurately explained; that, for example, in hydraulics, all
the portions of the fluids should be calculated in their motions; that,
in chemistry, we should know the precise proportion and amount of each
of the elements that are combined in the changes that bodies undergo.

On the contrary, every physiological explanation should give only
general views, approximations; it ought to be vague, if I may use the
term. Every calculation, every examination of the proportions of the
fluids with each other, all precise language should be banished from
it, because we yet know so little of the vital laws, they are subject
to so many variations, that what is true at the moment we study a fact,
ceases to be so the next, and the essence of the phenomena always
escapes us; their general results only, and the comparison of these
results with each other, should occupy us.


ARTICLE SECOND.

PULMONARY CAPILLARY SYSTEM.

I call by this name the assemblage of the fine and delicate
ramifications, which serve for the termination of the black blood and
the origin of the red, which consequently finish the pulmonary artery
and give origin to the pulmonary veins. The capillaries between the
bronchial arteries and veins have nothing to do with them, they have no
communication, and evidently belong to the general capillary system.


I. _Relation of the two Capillary Systems, Pulmonary and General._

In comparing the preceding system with this, it is difficult to
understand how they can exactly correspond, how the pulmonary can
transmit not only all that passes through the general, but also all the
lymph that returns from the serous surfaces and the cellular cavities,
all the chyle which enters by digestion, &c. &c.

It seems impossible at first view, that in the balance of the
circulation, these capillaries can, constantly and regularly, keep
in equilibrium with those of the rest of the body. By reflecting a
little, however, upon the phenomena of this function, we see that the
discordance is only apparent.

Though the general capillary system is everywhere spread out, yet the
portion in which blood circulates is much more limited than at first
appears. There is a great part of the vessels of this system, in
which fluids differing from the blood move and oscillate in different
directions. Then, where the blood especially enters, as in the muscles,
the mucous surfaces, &c. a considerable portion of this fluid, its
colouring matter particularly, is in a combined state, and not in a
state of circulation. If we cut a muscle transversely in a living
animal, inspection proves clearly this phenomenon, which, joined to the
preceding, diminishes immediately more than half the blood, which at
first appears to move in the general capillary system.

Yet it is evident, that there remains much more of it constantly in
this system than in the pulmonary; to be convinced of this, it is
only necessary to cut the lungs of a living animal. From this it is
clear, that if the heart presided over the motion of the blood in the
general system, and that consequently all that is contained in it was
driven into the veins at each pulsation, the pulmonary capillaries
would be insufficient to transmit it; but there goes out only a certain
quantity, proportioned to what the lungs can receive. It is nearly
the same as when the veins are much dilated, and consequently contain
much blood; no more arrives at the heart, because, as I have said, the
velocity is then in the inverse ratio of the capacity.

Besides, many causes continually divert the blood of the general
capillary system from the direction which carries it from the arteries
to the veins; these causes are especially the exhalations, secretions,
and nutrition. This capillary system is, as I have observed, a common
reservoir, whence the blood is carried into different and even opposite
directions, on one part in the direction of the veins, on another in
that of the exhalants, on another in that of the excretories, on
another, in fine, in that of the nutritive vessels. On the contrary,
in the pulmonary capillary system, there is but a single impulse, and
a single direction; it is that which carries the blood from the artery
to the pulmonary veins, which nothing draws off in its course; for in
passing from the black to the red, this fluid serves no other function;
it has no vessels, but the pulmonary veins, towards which its motion
is directed. There is, then, this great difference in the blood of the
pulmonary capillaries, and that of all the other parts, viz. that the
first is moved only in one direction, that all which arrives in the
lungs goes immediately in this direction; whereas the second has four
or five different directions. Hence this last necessarily oscillates
and varies in its motions, according as it is called more or less
powerfully by the exhalants, the excretories, the nourishing vessels,
or the veins; whereas the other, having but one way to escape, follows
it constantly and uniformly. Let us not be astonished, then, at the
disproportion there is in the capacity of the two capillary systems.

The proximity and distance of the heart are also a real cause that
tends to establish the equilibrium between the two systems. We have
seen, in fact, that each contraction of the left ventricle impresses a
sudden motion upon the whole mass of blood contained in the arteries,
and at the instant that this mass increases on one side, it is
diminished on the other by the quantity that is sent to the capillaries
of the whole body; so that the arterial motion is not progressive,
but sudden and instantaneous, so that at the same time the column of
aortic blood increases towards the heart, it diminishes in its remote
ramifications, and the fluid driven from the heart at each contraction,
does not arrive at the capillaries until after many contractions, since
that which goes from this organ cannot arrive at these vessels until
all which is before it has reached them. The same phenomenon precisely
takes place as it respects the black blood in the pulmonary artery.
Then the longer the course, the longer is the time that is required
for the blood to arrive at the capillaries, and consequently to pass
through them; then the blood from the right ventricle would arrive much
sooner at the left auricle, than that would at the right auricle which
goes from the left ventricle; then, though in what we call the small
circulation, the velocity is not greater, the space passed over being
less, the time employed to go over it is also less; then, the excess
of the fluid contained in the divisions of the aorta, in the general
capillary system, and in the general veins, over that contained in the
pulmonary artery, veins and capillary system, is compensated by the
time the second takes to go its course, which is short in comparison to
that of the first.

Hence we see, why in animals in whom the lungs, as to their
circulation, are in opposition to the rest of the body, nature has
constantly placed this organ at the side of the heart. If one of these
organs was at the head, and the other at the bottom of the pelvis, the
harmony would be inevitably interrupted.


II. _Remarks upon the Circulation of the Pulmonary Capillaries._

Since the blood of all the parts constantly goes through the lungs, it
is evident that an injury of the functions of this viscus would be felt
in all the parts. The phenomena of asphyxia prove that this in fact
takes place. It is in this way that the lungs are immediately connected
with life, and hence the ancient physicians placed its functions among
those which they called vital.

We understand also why pulmonary inflammations have so peculiar a
character; why they are distinguished from others by many phenomena.
No internal organ is more often inflamed than the lungs. If experience
did not prove this at the bed-side of the patient, the examination of
dead bodies would be sufficient to convince us of it. We find in fact
around the lungs, very often traces of old inflammations, particularly
adhesions of the pleura; a phenomenon so common, that I am confident
that there are more dead bodies found with it, than there are without
it. This is an essential difference of this membrane that distinguishes
it from all analogous ones, a difference that arises from the proximity
of the pleura to the organ that it covers. Different causes contribute
to this very great frequency of pulmonary inflammations. 1st. The lungs
are, among the internal organs, the most exposed to direct irritations,
either by the air that constantly enters them and can irritate them,
or by heterogeneous substances that it introduces, or especially by
the changes of heat and cold that it occasions. 2d. These organs are
connected by the most numerous sympathies with the other systems, the
cutaneous, for example; so that perhaps, as it respects inflammation,
a suppression of transpiration has as much influence upon the lungs
alone, as upon all the other organs together. It depends no doubt upon
this that the lungs correspond with all the others by their capillaries.

When the lungs are inflamed, is it the red blood of the bronchial
artery that flows to the irritated place, or the black blood of the
pulmonary artery? I think that it is difficult to decide this question
by experiment; but examination after death appears to prove that the
second performs an important part in it. In fact, this viscus is often
crowded so suddenly, that we can hardly believe that the first would be
able to furnish the blood. Sometimes, though it is not always the case,
we can trace as it were, the progress of this crowding by percussion,
which is infinitely less sonorous in the evening than the morning.
There died a short time since a patient under my care in the hospital,
in whom this difference was perceptible from hour to hour. The progress
is much less rapid, no doubt, in the greatest number of cases; but in
those the black blood has undoubtedly contributed to the crowding of
the lungs.

No organ in the animal economy acquires by inflammation, so great a
size in so short a time, and such excessive weight, as the lungs.
All who open dead bodies know this. Observe the lungs of one dead
of pneumonia; cut them, and you would say at first that they were
solid; they often look like liver, they exhibit the appearance of such
a heavy mass; but macerate them and soon the whole will escape in
fluids. Now examine comparatively the skin, the stomach, the liver,
the kidnies, &c. when they have been the seat of acute inflammation,
that has destroyed the patient; they have nothing approaching to this
enormous increase of fluid, which is seen in the substance of inflamed
lungs. Not only the cavity of the cells is full, but the organ is
also much dilated. I have often had occasion to open those who have
died of pneumonia, in whom one of the lungs was entirely sound; now,
the disproportion of weight between it and the affected one, was
incomparably greater than that between an inflamed kidney and a sound
one.

This phenomenon evidently arises from the fact, that the lungs alone
receive as much blood as the whole body, so that when an inflammation
of this viscus interrupts the course of the fluids, a very great
quantity of them can accumulate there in a given time. It is not
however, properly speaking, the blood that is found crowding the lungs
in pneumonia; the fluid appears whitish when pressed out; we should
say that it was a kind of pus. Much has been said of vomicæ after
pneumonia; but they are extremely rare; there is almost always effusion
in the lungs; the fluid is not collected in a sac.

In pulmonary inflammation, does the blood pass through vessels that do
not ordinarily circulate it, as happens so evidently upon the serous
surfaces, or conjunctiva, &c. when inflamed? I do not think it does,
for we do not know any vessels in the lungs, except the sanguineous.
It appears evident that the blood or the other fluids are effused into
the pulmonary texture, in which they are deposited by exhalation. There
is no doubt that in some phlegmons, this fluid passes, as I shall
say, into the cells of the cellular texture; now it appears that it
happens here in the same way. By breaking or cutting inflamed lungs,
we see clearly that its whole texture is crowded, and filled; whereas
in examining an inflamed serous surface, we see that the blood is
evidently contained in the capillaries.

It is a great mistake to try to represent inflammation as being
everywhere the same, as exhibiting always the fluids, like their
vessels, in the same state. Boerhaave for example thought, that there
could be no inflammation without an _error loci_. There is according
to the state of the parts, their structure, their vital properties, a
thousand different modifications in the new anatomical order that this
affection gives to the organs.

What constitutes the essence of inflammation is, 1st, the irritation of
the inflamed part; 2d, the new modifications that its vital forces have
taken in consequence of that irritation; 3d, the consequent stagnation
of the fluids around it. But in what manner the fluids are arrested;
how they stop in the capillary system; how they are taken up by the
exhalants; how they are poured out, in extravasations, &c.; these are
different effects that arise from the different organization of the
parts; but the principle is always the same, it is always the same
disease. If we could analyze thoroughly the state of all the systems in
inflammation, we should see perhaps, that there was a difference in the
inflammation of each. Besides, the diversity of the symptoms that it
exhibits, a diversity of which I have already spoken, proves that the
state of the solids and the fluids are not the same.

How is it that the blood can pass through the lungs of phthisical
patients, in whom this organ is reduced nearly one half? I would
observe upon this subject, that the blood in the great vessels is
diminished in proportion to the ulceration of the lungs. The diminution
of this fluid is remarkable in many organic affections, but especially
in these, as Portal has observed. If a phthisical patient in the
last stage had as much blood, as before the disease, the circulation
certainly could not go on, or at least there would be a constant reflux
towards the right auricle. Who is ignorant of the small pulse, feeble
though frequent, particularly towards night, in phthisis? Compare it
with the pulse of an inflammatory fever, in which there is evidently
plethora; you will see that they are really the two extremes.

I will make a general observation upon this subject, it is this, that
when the forces are weakened in our organs, or life languishes in them,
the blood is diminished almost continually in proportion; so that this
fluid being considered in the capillary system, as the resistance
opposed to the power of the small vessels, the proportion remains
always the same between this power and this resistance. It is necessary
that the whole should be in relation. If blood was transfused into a
phthisical patient, he would die, because the forces of the solids
would not correspond with the increase of action to which they would be
forced.

The circulation of the pulmonary capillaries, is, like that of the
others, under the influence of the tonic forces of the part, and not
under that of the impulse of the heart. This impulse terminates at the
extremity of the branches of the pulmonary artery. In inflammation then
of the lungs, the blood is not mechanically arrested in this organ;
then, when you bleed, it is not to diminish the _vis à tergo_. You
might draw ten basins from the patient, but the lungs most commonly
would not empty themselves; they would be less fatigued by the
entrance of the blood; but that which was stagnant in the capillary
system would still remain there. So long as there is a point of
irritation, it will be, if we may so say, a magnet which will attract
the blood, and completely change its direction; which was before from
the artery to the veins, it will now be only towards the irritated
point. Bleeding acts then, 1st, by diminishing the blood that enters
the lungs, and consequently by lessening the fatigue of this diseased
organ; 2d, by diminishing the irritation of the solid, which attracts
the blood, and retains it around the irritated place.

The constant excitement that the air gives to the pulmonary capillary
system is favourable to its circulation; but the blood can traverse
this system without this excitement, as is proved by my experiments
mentioned elsewhere.


III. _Alteration of the Blood in the Pulmonary Capillaries._

There takes place here the reverse of what happens in the general
capillaries; the fluid changes from black to red. We have already some
data upon the causes of this phenomenon; but I think new experiments
should be made before a thorough explanation can be given. This is so
much the more necessary, because if we knew how the black blood becomes
red, it would seem that we might know how the red becomes black.

I have stated the phenomena of this change of colour in my work upon
Life and Death; it would be superfluous to repeat them. There will be
found there also many details upon the circulation of the two capillary
systems, which I shall not mention here.


IV. _Remarks upon the state of the Lungs in Dead Bodies._

I will only corroborate here a remark already made in the same work,
upon the extreme frequency of pulmonary congestions in the last moments
of life. As the lungs alone receive the whole blood of the body,
when their forces are weakened, the blood stagnates and accumulates
in them; so that according to the state of their forces in the last
moments, and the disease, these organs will be more or less heavy,
and more or less full of blood. We hardly find them twice in the same
state. All subjects that die in pain have these congestions. Thus
compare the lungs of dead bodies in our dissecting rooms, with those
of animals killed in slaughter-houses; they are entirely different.
The organization is almost always concealed in the first by the fluids
that crowd them. We cannot study this organization well except in
subjects that have died of hemorrhage or syncope. In most others, it
is impossible to distinguish any thing. Hence no doubt the reason that
we know as yet so little of the intimate structure of this important
viscus, as the description I shall give of it will, I hope, prove. I
have shown elsewhere how we can at will accumulate a greater or less
quantity of blood in the lungs of an animal, by the way in which we
kill him.

No other organ in the economy exhibits these extreme varieties of
congestion at the moment of death, in so evident a manner at least,
because no one is a centre of circulation, like the lungs; the liver
even is not an exception, as I have observed. In this respect, those
who open dead bodies, and examine the state of the lungs, should
carefully distinguish the congestion that arises from the disease,
from that which may be perhaps the effect of the interruption of the
circulation in the last moments. I suppose two affections of the chest
exactly similar in their nature, duration and the two subjects they
attack; that syncope terminates the life of one of them; that that of
the other is closed after long distress, in which there is what is
called the rattles; the lungs of the second will certainly weigh much
more than those of the first.

It is very probable that during life, the lungs are in very different
degrees of congestion. We know that most chronic diseases of this organ
occasion, when the patients take rather violent exercise, a sense of
suffocation, oppression, &c. which appear to be owing only to the
superabundance of blood, which, not being able to pass through this
viscus as fast as it is sent there, is stopt, and checks the entrance
and exit of the air.

It is only the diseases of the lungs and heart that are accompanied
constantly with these oppressions, and sense of suffocation. This is
seen in this last organ in aneurisms, sometimes in ossifications, &c.




EXHALANT SYSTEM.


Exhalation and secretion are two functions, analogous in this, that
both of them separate from the blood fluids differing from it, and pour
them upon surfaces where they serve different uses. But the following
are their differences.

1st. In exhalation, there is no intermediate organ between the arteries
and the exhalants; a capillary net-work alone separates them; whilst
on the contrary there is always an intermediate organ between the
excretories and the arteries; it is in this organ that the capillaries
are found, in which the second begin and the first terminate. 2d.
The organized machines which elaborate the secreted fluids are then
much more complicated than those which separate the exhaled fluids.
Thus the bile, the urine, the saliva, &c. differ on the one hand
essentially from the blood, and are on the other much compounded;
whilst the serum, &c. closely resembles some parts of the blood, and
is but slightly compounded, containing but few elements. This double
distinctive character of the two kinds of fluids appears to me to be
very striking. 3d. The exhaled fluids are poured out by an infinity
of small tubes separate from each other; the secreted fluids, on the
contrary, are collected in one or more principal tubes that pour them
on the surface where they terminate. 4th. The exhaled fluids re-enter
in great part into the circulation, after having been thrown out; the
secreted fluids, on the contrary, appear to be especially destined
to be rejected. 5th. Many parts receive the first fluids; they are
deposited upon the serous, mucous, synovial and cutaneous surfaces,
in the cellular texture and even in all the organs of nutrition. The
mucous and cutaneous surfaces, the first especially, are the only ones
upon which the others are poured out.

It follows from all these considerations, that the exhaled fluids, as
the fat, the serum, the synovia, the marrow, &c. differ essentially
from the secreted fluids, as the bile, the urine, the saliva, the
mucous, prostate, spermatic, pancreatic fluids, &c. This difference
appears to have struck a great number of authors; yet most of them
have made use of the term secretion to express the separation of
the exhaled fluids from the mass of blood. I think that there is
much analogy between exhalation and secretion. In both, there is the
capillary system, as I have said, between the vessel that brings and
that which carries away; but the capillary system is certainly arranged
very differently in a gland, from what it is in a serous surface; for
example, wherever there is exhalation, there is certainly nothing but
the capillary system; but where there is secretion, the secretory
organ is too considerable not to admit of something more. Besides, by
trusting to inspection, and without wishing to examine the intimate
nature of the organs, it is evident that where there is secretion,
there is a gland, and that this gland is wanting where there is
exhalation.


ARTICLE FIRST.

GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE EXHALANTS.


I. _Origin, course, and termination._

Authors have formed very different ideas concerning the exhalants.
We know the decreasing vessels of Boerhaave, and the error loci for
which his imagination created these vessels. Lately all the white
vessels continuous with the arteries have been rejected, and in order
to explain exhalation, recourse has been had only to inorganic pores
in the arterial parietes, through which the fluids transude upon the
organs. Frequent observation of similar transudations upon the dead
body, as those of the bile through the gall-bladder, of the marrow
through the osseous texture which it discolours, &c. is one of the
great supports of this method of explaining the exhalant system. But
we have already many times observed, that these phenomena never take
place during life, when the organic sensibility of the parts refuses
to produce them. Besides, exhalation is evidently subjected to the
influence of the vital forces, since it varies continually in a part,
according as the vital forces of the part themselves vary. Moreover,
if the exhaled fluids escaped through inorganic pores, it would be
necessary that not only the vascular parietes, but also those of the
serous surfaces which receive these fluids, should be perforated
with small holes; why then would not these fluids, of which these
surfaces are the reservoirs, transude into the neighbouring cellular
texture? Let us reject then every opinion that disregards anatomical
observation, and let us endeavour by this observation to ascertain what
the exhalants are.

It is undoubtedly difficult to form a precise idea of these vessels,
their extreme tenuity constantly conceals them from us in a natural
state. Yet by the aid of experiments and accurate reasoning, it
appears to me that we may come at some degree of accuracy.

We have seen that the existence of a capillary system terminating
the arteries, is in the parts where exhalation takes place as in the
others, a thing incontestably proved by experiment with injections, by
inflammations which arise spontaneously, and by those that are produced
at will; so that a serous, cutaneous surface, &c. on which nothing
appears, is covered with an infinity of little vessels suddenly in the
first case, and at the end of a longer or shorter time in the second.

If the injection is not pushed very far, it is confined to the
capillary system; but if it succeeds, it pours from all parts upon
the surface, where exhalation takes place in the ordinary state. This
dew mechanically produced, evidently resembles that which the tonic
force of the parts occasions during life; for, as I have said, if it
was a transudation, there would be extravasation in the neighbouring
textures, whereas nothing is filled from the syringe which propels
the injection to the exhalants that pour it out, except the arteries,
the capillaries and these exhalants. Besides, when there is active
hemorrhage, the capillaries from which arise the exhalants that pour
out the blood, are evidently more full of fluid than ordinary, as I
have already remarked.

From these considerations and many others that will be explained
hereafter in this system, I think that we may consider the exhalants as
arising from the capillary system, by means of which they are continued
with the arteries, which bring them the materials of exhalation.

But to say what is the length of these vessels, what their form, what
course they run, is evidently impossible; it is here that the imaginary
descriptions begin. We distinguish with difficulty their orifices. We
see upon the skin many little pores that evidently form communications
from within to without; but these pores transmit not only the
exhalants, but also the absorbents, the hair, &c. as we shall see in
the dermoid system. 1st. The existence of the exhalants; 2d, their
origin in the capillary system of the part where they are found; 3d,
their termination upon different surfaces, are upon the whole all that
is accurately known.

The mode of origin undoubtedly varies, but we do not know how it takes
place. The exhalants are continued with their capillary net-work, in
such a manner that we cannot say precisely where one finishes and
the others begin. Hence why often in this work, in speaking of these
small tubes, I suppose them to come immediately from the arteries,
and forming the capillaries by their interlacing; this is evidently
sufficient to understand what will be said hereafter.


II. _Division of the Exhalants._

There are three classes of exhalants which I distinguish by the fluids
or the substances they furnish.

The first class contains those that throw out the fluids not destined
to enter the economy again; such are, 1st, the cutaneous exhalants that
pour out the sweat; 2d, the mucous exhalants that furnish a part of the
pulmonary perspiration, the greatest part being formed, as I shall say,
by the dissolution of the mucous fluids of respiration, which yield
perhaps the gastric, intestinal juices, &c.

In the second class are found the exhalants, that throw out fluids
that remain for some time upon certain surfaces or in certain cells;
and which afterwards taken up by absorption, re-enter the circulation
through the lymphatics. These are, 1st, the serous exhalants which
deposit upon their respective surfaces the serum which lubricates the
membranes and facilitates the motions of the organs they cover; 2d,
the cellular exhalants which pour out into the cells, on the one part
serum, on the other fat; 3d, the medullary exhalants which carry into
the middle of the bones the juices of the same name; 4th, the synovial
exhalants which deposit the synovia, either upon the articulations, or
in the tendinous grooves.

The third class contains the exhalants that carry to all the organs the
nutritive substance that repairs them, and which is afterwards taken up
by absorption, to be replaced by new substances.

I adopt in my course of physiology the division I have just pointed
out, to explain the different exhalations, of which the last evidently
leads me to speak of nutrition, a function which is the general end of
those that form organic life. We can represent in the following table,
all the different exhalations; it presents the assemblage of the organs
that execute them.

            ┌1st. exterior,  ┌1st. Dermoid.
            │ open upon      │
            │ the systems,   └2d. Mucous.
            │                ┌1st Serous.
            │                │2d. Cellular, ┌1st. Serum.
            │                │ where they   │
  EXHALANTS.│                │ pour out,    └2d. Fat.
            │2d. interior,   │              ┌1st. of the short, flat
            │ open upon      │3d Medullary. │ bones, and the extremities
            │ the systems,   │              │ of the long ones.
            │                │              │2d. of the middle of the
            │                │              └ long bones.
            │                │
            │                │              ┌1st. of the articulations.
            │                └4th. Synovial.└2d. of the tendons.
            │
            └3d. nutritive.   Each organized texture has its own
                               exhalants.

This is an accurate table of all the fluids that go out of the blood,
without the intervention of the glands, and by the way of exhalation.
The two first classes have vessels, as is accurately proved by
experiment, observation and even inspection. As to the nutritive
exhalants, there is no doubt but that new substances are continually
carried to the organs to repair them; now it is necessary that these
substances should have vessels; these vessels certainly cannot draw
what they deposit in them, except from the capillary system in which
they terminate. If injections or other means do not accurately prove
the existence of these exhalants, it seems to me that this reasoning
forces us to admit them.

Physiologists had not hitherto collected together all the exhalations;
each was explained in treating of the system where it was found. I have
thus given reflections upon each in the exposition of the different
textures; the arrangement of the general anatomy required it; but
in works or in lectures on physiology, they ought evidently to be
presented under the same point of view as absorptions.


III. _Difference of the Exhalations._

Though we know not what is the structure of the exhalants, yet we
cannot doubt but that this structure differs remarkably in the
different systems. Observe in fact that these vessels enter, as
it were, like elements into the textures they compose, and that
consequently they must necessarily partake of the different and
distinctive characters which these textures exhibit.

It is to this difference that we must refer without doubt what we see
in injections. They go out, if they are fine, by the mucous, serous and
even cellular exhalants; but those which furnish the synovia, transmit
them with much more difficulty; it is the same in the capillary system;
whilst the serous surfaces in this system are filled with great ease,
and blackened by injections, as it were at will, the synovial surfaces
are penetrated with much more difficulty.


ARTICLE SECOND.

PROPERTIES, FUNCTIONS, AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE EXHALANT SYSTEM.


I. _Properties._

The vessels of the exhalant system are too delicate to allow us to
analyze their properties of texture. Do they enlarge when the red
globules enter them? I am wholly ignorant. Haller, who admitted that
there were exhalants, thought that white fluids alone entered them,
because their diameter was disproportioned to that of the red globules.
This opinion is also that of the school of Boerhaave. Who has ever
measured comparatively the respective diameters of the vessels and the
particles of the fluids? All such expressions, as fine fluids, coarse
fluids, &c. which are still used by many physicians, have originated
from this theory and are still used, though the theory itself has been
admitted to be false. I have said twenty times, and I again repeat it,
that the only cause which prevents the red globules from passing into
vessels with white fluids, is the want of relation between the nature
of the fluid and the sensibility of the organ.

The properties of animal life have evidently no connexion with
the exhalants. Of those of organic life, they have in the highest
degree those of organic sensibility and the corresponding insensible
contractility; it is upon these that all their functions depend.


_Characters of the Vital Properties._

Though organic sensibility is everywhere given to the exhalants, it
varies however remarkably in each system; that of the mucous exhalants
is not the same as that of the serous. In general the exhalants
entering as it were like elements into the texture of each system,
partake completely of the organic properties of that system; or rather
their properties are the same. Hence, 1st, why each separates the
fluid that is peculiar to it; why consequently, when much water is
introduced into the circulation by drinking, the cutaneous exhalants,
and never the serous, appropriate it to themselves, and transmit it out
of the blood; when we run much and a general agitation is consequently
given by the heart to the mass of blood in circulation, the cutaneous
exhalants, being more powerfully excited by this impression than the
serous, the synovial, &c. separate more sweat; 2d, why the serous do
not pour out fat, the medullary serum, &c. though the mass of blood
that enters the capillaries that are continuous with these exhalants,
is everywhere the same; 3d, why when the exhalants pour out fluids that
they are not accustomed to, or when their natural fluids are altered,
these fluids differ essentially from each other; why, for example,
after inflammation, it is only upon the serous surfaces that we see
a milky serum; why nothing resembling pus flows from the inflamed
medullary membrane; why the fluids, the result of the inflammation
of the synovial membranes, are very different from those that the
serous surfaces produce, &c.; 4th, why certain exhalants have a much
greater tendency than others to admit blood and pour it out upon
their respective surfaces, of which we see an example in the mucous
exhalants, which are so disposed to suffer this fluid to pass, that a
thousand circumstances occasion hemorrhages from them; 5th, why among
the mucous exhalants themselves, some have a much greater tendency than
other to permit the blood to pass, &c. &c.

All these phenomena are evidently derived from the particular
modifications that distinguish the organic sensibility and
contractility in each kind of exhalants.


II. _Of Natural Exhalations._

What I have said will enable us to explain how exhalation is effected.
It is by the same principle as that to which we have before referred;
it is that which will serve for the explanation of secretions,
absorptions, &c. There is between the elements which form each exhaled
fluid and the organic sensibility of each kind of exhalants, such a
relation, that these elements alone can be admitted by the vessels
which reject the others, so long as there is no change in their kind of
sensibility. The general capillary system appears to be the reservoir,
in which, as I have said, the blood is elaborated; it is there that
the red blood becomes black; it is there at the same time that its
different elements are separated, combine anew, and during these
changes disengage caloric. It is after these changes, these different
transformations, that each exhalant takes, chooses as it were the
portions with which its sensibility is in relation, and leaves the
others.

It follows hence as a very simple consequence, that whenever the
organic sensibility of the system in which exhalation takes place
is altered in any manner, exhalation should also immediately vary;
and this in fact always happens. There is never any derangement in
the exhalations, without a preceding one in the sensibility of the
exhalants. Take for example the different injuries of transpiration;
you will see that cold, heat, dryness, moisture, frictions, &c. always
exert their influence upon the cutaneous sensibility, and that the
derangements of the exhalation are consequent to them.

The organic sensibility of the exhalants, like that of every other
part, may be disordered in different ways, 1st, by a direct stimulant,
as when cold contracts the skin, when a very cold fluid acts upon
the stomach, &c.; 2d, by sympathies, as when the acute affection of
the fibrous and muscular organs produces sweat in rheumatism; 3d,
oftentimes without our being able to say how, a derangement takes place
in the vital forces of a part; of this inflammation presents frequent
examples. I do not allude here to that which takes place from the
contiguity of organs, &c. &c.

It follows from this, that when exhalation is preternaturally increased
or diminished, the sensibility of the exhalants is always modified in
one of the three preceding ways.

Now if we reflect upon the different kinds of exhalants, we shall see
that there are no others except the cutaneous and the mucous which are
exposed to the immediate application of stimuli, since they alone are
in relation with external bodies. Besides the two modes of alteration
of sensibility that they share with others, they have moreover this.
It is not then astonishing, that their exhalations, especially
the cutaneous, exhibit such numerous varieties, that the skin is
continually found varying between the greatest dryness and the most
copious sweat.

The sympathetic exhalations are extremely numerous. I shall not give
examples of them here; many may be found in the sympathies of the
dermoid, serous, mucous systems, &c. I would only observe that authors
have not sufficiently distinguished this kind of exhalations from
the others; nor has sufficient attention been paid to sympathetic
secretions.

The exhalations are never all increased or diminished at the same
time; I except however the state of excitement at the commencement
of some fevers, when all are suppressed. In every other case, when
one fluid is abundantly poured out, the others are diminished; thus
the skin is dry in dropsies. There is sweating in the first stages of
phthisis pulmonalis; but when in the latter, dropsical effusions are
considerable, sweating ceases.

I have moreover divided into two classes the causes of increased
exhalations. 1st, One of these proves an increase of life; 2d, the
other, a real diminution of the vital forces; hence active and passive
exhalations. How can the same phenomenon arise from two causes exactly
opposite? It is difficult to determine precisely; but so many phenomena
prove this distinction of exhalations as well as secretions, that we
cannot refuse to admit it. It is important to recollect this in the
following article.


III. _Of Preternatural Exhalations._

I call by this name those, in which the exhalants pour out a fluid
different from that which is natural to them. The first which offers is
that of the blood.


_Sanguineous Exhalation._

The blood frequently passes off by the exhalants instead of their own
fluids; hence arise hemorrhages very different from those that take
place from rupture. I shall examine these hemorrhages in each kind of
exhalants.


_Hemorrhage of the Excrementitious Exhalants._

The vulgar expression which is sometimes used, to sweat blood and
water, &c. indicates that under certain circumstances, though they
are very rare, the cutaneous exhalants give passage to the blood.
Haller has collected a number of instances of it, that may be found in
his work. The first year that I came to Paris, I saw constantly with
Desault, a woman with a cancer of the womb, who had at certain periods
sweats that stained her clothes as much as is ordinarily done by the
catamenia. This woman had had frequent hemorrhages before the beginning
of her disease. After these sweats commenced, they had continued but
were more rare. I regret that I neglected to collect the particulars of
this singular fact.

No exhalants pour out blood more frequently than the mucous; so that
hemorrhages are an affection almost characteristic of the mucous
surfaces, in which they have different names, according to the portion
of them that are attacked. It is not my object to present here the
phenomena of these hemorrhages; I only wish to prove that they are an
exhalation.

1st. I have very often opened subjects that have died during a
hemorrhage; I have had occasion to examine with this view the
bronchial, gastric, intestinal and uterine surfaces; I have never
seen the least mark of erosion, notwithstanding the precaution of
carefully washing the surfaces, of letting them macerate and even
examining them with a glass. 2d. The following experiment uniformly
succeeds upon the wombs of women who have died during menstruation,
and often even at other times; by pressing them, there issues from the
mucous surface a greater or less number of little bloody drops, which
evidently correspond with vascular extremities, and being wiped off,
no erosion can be seen. 3d. The analogy of all the other open surfaces
that pour out blood, and which evidently do it by their exhalants,
is a proof that the same phenomenon has the same seat in the mucous
surfaces. 4th. The womb would be only a mass of cicatrices in females
of advanced age, if there had been a rupture in it in menstruation.
5th. In active hemorrhages, in which there is evidently a congestion of
blood previous to its escape, we can conceive, to a certain degree of
the rupture of the small vessels; but in passive hemorrhages, in those
in which the organic sensibility being annihilated, seems to allow of
a simple transudation through the exhalants, how can we conceive of
these ruptures? 6th. We understand with difficulty how an evacuation,
which is often produced with an extreme rapidity, which ceases in one
place and immediately appears in another, which is subjected to all
the sympathetic influences, we understand, I say, with difficulty how
it can happen from rupture. 7th. Observe menstruation, furnishing
sometimes for one moment blood, and not giving it the next, renewing
twenty or thirty times a day, in certain affections, these alterations
of flowing and ceasing to flow; it would be necessary then, that at
each time the wounds should open and be cicatrized. 8th. Besides,
compare hemorrhages evidently produced by rupture upon the mucous
surfaces, such as those, which in wounds of the head, take place from
the nostrils, the ears, &c.; those, which by a fall upon the rectum,
sometimes happen from the bladder; those which, in too great efforts in
coughing, arise upon the bronchial surface; those of which the stomach
is the seat from the action of different poisons, &c. &c.; compare, I
say, these hemorrhages, and many analogous ones that I could mention,
with those that take place spontaneously from the mucous surfaces; you
will see that they do not resemble them in their phenomena and their
duration; that by suppressing them, they do not give rise to others;
that they are independent of all kinds of sympathetic influence; that
the passions have no effect upon their cessation or their production,
whilst they have so powerful an influence upon the others.

Let us conclude from all these considerations, that all mucous
hemorrhages, whether active or passive, are real exhalations. Hence
you see that there is not so great a difference as might be thought,
between the first and inflammation. In fact, in one there is an
accumulation of blood in the capillary system, then the passage of this
fluid by the exhalant vessels, that are continuous with this system. In
the other, there is only the first phenomenon. Undoubtedly the signs,
the circumstances, &c. are wholly different, because the modifications
the organic sensibility undergoes are not the same; but the state in
which the small vessels and the blood are respectively found, is not
less analogous. One proof that in active hemorrhages, it is the organic
sensibility which, differently modified, opens or closes the passage
to the blood by the exhalants, is this, that almost always there are
previous symptoms which continue for some time, and which evidently
declare the disturbance that the vital forces, the organic sensibility
in particular, experience in the part; we know the itching, the
forerunner of nasal hemorrhages, the tickling and sometimes sense
of heat which precede the pectoral. Sometimes, according to the
varieties of alteration it undergoes, the organic sensibility at first
permits serous fluids to pass, then bloody; this is what we see in
menstruation, in which the exhalants oftentimes pour out serum for some
minutes, then true blood.

In passive hemorrhages, the organic sensibility is without doubt
diminished, as well as the tone or insensible organic contractility.
We might say, that the small vessels were not able then to contract
sufficiently to retain the blood; it is as in our injections which
ooze from the mucous surfaces, because life no longer opposes their
passage. Observe that when these hemorrhages are produced by an organic
disease, it is almost always that portion of mucous surface nearest the
organ, that is influenced by it. Thus in the last stages of disease of
the heart or the lungs, the patients often spit blood; they pass it by
stool, towards the termination of those of the liver, or even throw it
up by vomiting, &c. The whole mucous system never loses its forces so
as to pour out blood everywhere; it is only in a determinate part that
it is weakened.

What disposes the mucous exhalants more than all the others to pour out
blood? It appears to be because the capillary system whence they arise
is constantly entered by blood, and the course is very short from this
fluid when present in the capillaries to the mucous surfaces. This is
so true, that those portions of the mucous system that have but little
of this fluid in a natural state, as those of the sinuses of the face,
of the ear, &c. are less subject to hemorrhages. I am confident, that
if there were exhalants upon the muscles to pour out constantly a fluid
upon the exterior of these organs, hemorrhages would be very frequent
in them.

Hence we see that the mucous hemorrhages have nothing in common,
but the extravasation of blood, with those which are the effect of
hemorrhoids, and always suppose a rupture of the veins, with those
that aneurisms or varices produce, with those that are the effect of a
cut, of a violent concussion, &c. They form a class by themselves, and
resemble those only that the exhalants furnish upon the other surfaces
where they open.

If I should class hemorrhages, I should distinguish them, 1st, into
those that come from exhalation; 2d, into those that are produced
by rupture. I should place among the first the bloody sweats, the
mucous, serous, cellular hemorrhages, &c.; among the second, those that
accompany wounds, aneurisms, &c. In order to embrace in one view all
the sanguineous evacuations that can happen in the animal economy, I
think it absolutely necessary to adopt this division which moreover
accords with the phenomena and treatment of hemorrhages. Would you
bleed to arrest a hemorrhage from rupture? undoubtedly not; but you
would bleed to check an active hemorrhage by exhalation, because by
diminishing the mass of blood, you diminish the excess of organic
sensibility which produces the hemorrhage; it is nearly the same as
when we bleed for inflammation. It is certainly necessary that the
hemorrhage should be stopped as it has been produced; it is necessary
that the sensibility of the exhalants should return to its natural type
before the blood ceases to flow. We do not bleed to draw the blood
to another place, as has been said; if it was so it should be done
in passive hemorrhages. Most of those who bleed much in hemorrhages,
believe that plethora is the sole cause that produces them, that the
vessels containing too much blood, require a part of it to be taken
away; but there are many more cases of active hemorrhage in which
there are no signs of plethora, than there are of those in which these
signs exist. There may be a real deficiency of this fluid in the
great vessels, but if the exhalants of a part are by their peculiar
sensibility in relation with it, they will pour it out in as great
abundance as if there was an excess of it. It is as in the increase
of natural secretions, exhalations, &c. Whether there was plethora
or not in the great vessels, when the local affection has raised the
peculiar sensibility of the secretories or the exhalants, they would
draw abundantly from the blood. The influence of plethora upon the
increase of the different fluids which are separated from the blood,
is evidently one of the remains of the opinions of Boerhaave. If the
heart agitated everywhere the fluids, if it propelled the blood, the
serum, &c. that go out by the exhalants, the, secreted fluids that go
out by their ducts, this influence would necessarily be real; but since
all the fluids going from the capillary system are necessarily beyond
every action of the heart, as in their circulation, they are wholly
under that of the organic sensibility and tone of the capillaries,
it is evident that these fluids are independent of the quantity of
blood contained in the great vessels and moved by the heart; that the
alterations of the vital forces of the part are the sole causes of the
different phenomena that their course exhibits.

Who does not know that feeble and delicate temperaments are often
subject in women to a much more copious menstruation than those that
are stronger, more vigorous, more sanguineous, as it is called? You
will find many results in authors, upon the quantity of blood evacuated
by the catamenia, and you will observe at the same time that these
results do not resemble each other; why? because each womb has, if you
may so say, its own temperament, which oftentimes does not correspond
with the general temperament, because each is disposed consequently to
a different kind of vitality. There is more or less blood then given
at each menstruation, as it is given for a greater or less time, for
some women have at first only a serous fluid, while others have blood
immediately. I cannot repeat it too much, that every vital phenomenon
is necessarily subjected to many irregularities, which arise from those
to which the vital forces are themselves exposed. On the contrary,
every physical phenomenon is almost immutable, because it is the nature
of physical laws to remain always the same.

Hence we see how hemorrhages of the great arteries, which are under
the immediate influence of the heart, should differ essentially from
those of the capillary system and of the exhalants, whose phenomena
are under the influence of the forces of the part where they happen,
whether they arise from rupture or exhalation. Though in fact these two
classes may be essentially different in their principal phenomena, as I
have already said, yet they approximate, because the modifications of
the vital forces of the part have a necessary influence upon them when
they are in the capillary system. Thus astringents, tonics, styptics
and other medicines which evidently act upon the organic sensibility
and the insensible contractility, frequently stop hemorrhages of the
capillary system. The contact of the air, by modifying these properties
in wounds is even sufficient to produce this effect. On the contrary,
ligatures alone can, in the great vessels, resist the powerful
influence of the heart. All styptics imaginable may be heaped upon an
open artery, and they would not check the effect of this influence.
This then is the essential difference between the hemorrhages of the
capillaries and exhalants, and those of the arteries, that every
medicine which acts upon the organic sensibility and tone, can be
advantageously employed for the first, whereas they have no effect upon
the second. I go now to the sanguineous exhalations which are made by
the recrementitious exhalants.


_Hemorrhages of the Recrementitious Exhalants._

The serous membranes are the frequent seat of hemorrhages. The
examination of dead bodies incontestably proves it. Nothing is more
common than to find in the peritoneum, the pleura, the pericardium, &c.
a serum, reddish if a little blood is effused, very red if more, and
even pure blood is found under certain circumstances.

I have made these observations in two different cases, 1st. After
inflammations whether acute or chronic, especially the last. The serous
sac then contains a greater or less quantity of blood, sometimes alone,
more frequently mixed with serum, and now and then even with whitish
and albuminous flakes. The previous inflammation seems to rank these
hemorrhages among the active. 2d. Often at the end of organic diseases,
in which the exhalations of serum increase almost uniformly in the
serous sacs so as to produce dropsies evidently passive, a greater or
less quantity of blood is mixed with this serum. What anatomist has not
observed these bloody effusions in the pericardium, the pleura, &c.? I
have observed that the tunica vaginalis and arachnoides are infinitely
less subject to them than other similar sacs; I have never seen them in
the last, and twice only in the first. I of course do not speak of the
hemorrhages that are the effects of wounds of the head and in which the
blood is effused between the two folds of the arachnoides.

I have carefully examined the internal surface of the peritoneum, the
pleura, and the pericardium, after this kind of hemorrhages, produced
either in consequence of the inflammation of the membrane itself, or of
an organic disease; their surface has appeared to me to be perfectly
sound, so that it is very evident that the exhalants have furnished
blood, instead of the serum they threw out there before.

I compare a serous surface preternaturally pouring out blood after
inflammation, with the active hemorrhages of the mucous surfaces. On
the other hand, when the serous exhalants throw out blood at the end of
organic diseases of the heart, the womb, the lungs, &c. it is certainly
the same phenomenon, as when blood brought by the mucous exhalants,
under like circumstances, is thrown off by spitting, vomiting, or stool.

Are there cases during life, in which the blood, poured out by
exhalation upon the serous surfaces, is afterwards taken up by
absorption? I believe that it may happen after inflammation, though
we are possessed of no positive facts upon the subject. Cruikshank
and Mascagni have seen the blood absorbed by lymphatic vessels, after
wounds of the chest; why might not that happen after hemorrhages by
exhalation, which takes place after those from rupture?

The cellular exhalants frequently pour out blood in the cells. 1st.
This phenomenon is often very evident in phlegmon or in other similar
tumours. By cutting into them, in the dead body, we find blood
extravasated in the cells; this is so true, that some authors have made
the nature of inflammation consist in this extravasation. But in slight
phlegmonous inflammation, the blood undoubtedly remains in the cellular
capillary system; it is only in those cases where the inflammation
is very great, that this passage takes place. 2d. As to the passive
hemorrhages of the cellular texture, who does not know that oftentimes
the water in dropsies is reddish? who does not know, that in scurvy,
considerable portions of the cellular texture are infiltrated with
blood, which has certainly not been poured out by erosion? I injected
not long since two subjects, with very evident scorbutic spots on the
legs, and there was no kind of extravasation in them; there would have
been if the rupture of the vessels produced these spots. As these
things did not arrest my attention particularly in former years, I did
not pay much attention to many subjects that I have injected with these
scorbutic spots. I do not think that they would ever have presented
cellular effusions, which would undoubtedly have struck me if they were
there, when I dissected bodies for the students.

As to the hemorrhages of the medullary exhalants, we are ignorant of
them. I have never seen in examinations of dead bodies, blood effused
in the articulations, except from wounds, &c.

As to the nutritive exhalants, it is evident that every sanguineous
exhalation is foreign to them.


_Preternatural Exhalations, not Sanguineous._

The blood is not the only fluid that sometimes passes by the exhalants
instead of the fluids that these small vessels naturally pour out. Who
does not know how much the sweat differs? Sometimes water is almost
alone transmitted by the skin; at other times the sweat is filled
with many substances more or less heterogeneous; it is more or less
salt; we know how very different at times is the odour of it. Observe
the many substances that are thrown out upon the external surface by
the exhalants, in the small pox, measles, scarlatina, &c. in herpetic
affections, in different eruptions; compare the critical sweats with
those that are natural, and you will see that the exhalants are, if
I may so express myself, a common passage, which all the substances
contained in the body can pass through, and which in fact they do pass
through in certain cases, when, among the numerous modifications of
which the cutaneous organic sensibility is susceptible, they find those
that are in relation with them. Shall I speak of the serous exhalants?
observe that the surfaces of the same name, according as they are
affected, pour out many different fluids, a milky serum, and a thick
substance that attaches itself to their surface in the form of a
compact membrane, &c. If you have opened but little the bodies of those
who have died of chronic peritonitis, you must have been astonished
at the diversity of fluids then contained in the peritoneum. Grey,
yellowish, fetid, without odour, thick, viscid, thin, &c. &c. these
fluids are hardly twice the same. The serum appears to be always the
general vehicle; but the substances that it contains, by the effect
of the change that disease has produced in the vital forces of the
membrane, are infinitely variable.

Thus we shall see that the glands are a common way, through which pass,
according to the manner in which they are affected, many substances
which differ essentially from those that compose the secreted fluids in
the natural state.


IV. _Of the Preternatural Development of the Exhalants._

The exhalants are developed preternaturally in many parts; it is
especially in the cysts that this development is best seen. Their
internal surface, ordinarily smooth, pours out very different fluids,
according to the particular sensibility they possess. When we open
these cysts, the exhalants furnish new fluids, and it is often
necessary to remove them to prevent exhalation. Sometimes instead of
the fluid that is ordinarily exhaled there, the blood is thrown out, as
happens on the serous surfaces; for example, I have found very bloody
serum in the encysted dropsies of the ovarium; latterly I have seen
in them coagulated blood. I would observe that this is an essential
difference to be added to those mentioned above, between the fluids
that are exhaled and those that are secreted. These last are never
preternaturally poured out in a cyst. We never find preternaturally
a quantity of bile, of urine, saliva, serum, &c. whilst we often
find serum, as in encysted dropsies, fat as in steatoma and other
tumours which have a fatty liquid analogous to this fluid, synovia,
as in the tumours called ganglions, when they are not dilatations of
the synovial glands, which have cysts preternaturally produced, &c.
Whence arises this difference? it would be necessary that the glands
should be preternaturally developed in our parts, in order that the
secreted fluids might be preternaturally separated from the blood, now
the structure of these organs is too complicated, their organization
supposes too many conditions, to admit of their preternatural
development. On the contrary, the simple organization of the exhalant
surfaces, which have only vessels continuous with the arteries, and
without an intermediate organ, requires much less for them to grow
preternaturally in parts, in which they were before unknown.

Sometimes the fluids exhaled preternaturally do not collect in a cyst;
they continually flow out; this is what takes place in fistulas, and
other preternatural or artificial drains that are made in our organs.
Then the cellular texture, constantly preserving the preternatural
modification of sensibility that it has taken locally from a deposit,
or any other circumstance, constantly continues to pour out a fluid
different from the serum that is exhaled in a natural state.




ABSORBENT SYSTEM.


This system results from the union of a multitude of small vessels
which arise from all the parts, and carry different fluids that are
poured into the black blood, after having passed through certain
peculiar swellings that are called lymphatic glands, and which make
a part of the system with them. The whole of the absorbent system
comprehends then two things, 1st, the vessels; 2d, the swellings or
glands, an improper name, inasmuch as it assimilates them with organs
which pour out fluids by the excretories that arise from them.


ARTICLE FIRST.

_Of the Absorbent Vessels._

We shall examine these vessels in their origin, their course and their
termination.


I. _Origin of the Absorbents._

The origin of the absorbents can hardly be demonstrated by inspection;
it is like the termination of the exhalants. Such is in fact the
extreme delicacy of these vessels at their origin, in most parts,
that they cannot be seen with the best optical instruments. In some
places we see pores; but it is difficult to distinguish their nature,
whether they are exhalant or absorbent. Their origin then must be
determined by the phenomena they produce in different places. Wherever
absorption takes place, it is evident that there they begin. Now in
examining attentively the phenomena of absorptions, we see that they
are discoverable whenever there are exhalations; so that the same table
may serve both for the absorbents and the exhalants; the following is
the table for the first.

             ┌1st. exterior, arising ┌1st. mucous.
             │ from the systems      └2d. dermoid.
             │
             │                 ┌1st. serous.
             │                 │2d. cellular, ┌1st. fat.
             │                 │ and taking   │
             │                 │ up there,    └2d. serum.
  ABSORBENTS.│2d. interior,    │
             │ arising from    │              ┌1st. the short and flat
             │ the systems     │              │ bones, and the extremities
             │                 │3d. medullary │ of the long ones.
             │                 │              │2d. the middle of the
             │                 │              └ long bones.
             │                 │
             │                 └4th. synovial.┌1st. the articulations.
             └3d. of nutrition.               └2d. the tendinous grooves.

Let us examine these different absorptions, of which I shall not give
the proofs here in detail, because these proofs will be shown in each
system from which the absorbents arise. 1st. The external absorptions
do not correspond precisely with the exhalations of the same nature.
In fact, neither the sweat nor insensible transpiration exhaled by
the skin, are taken up by the cutaneous absorbents; these fluids
are excrementitious. So the mucous absorbents allow the pulmonary
transpiration to evaporate, and the other fluids exhaled upon their
surface, to mix with the aliments and afterwards to pass off. It is the
substances contained in the atmosphere, in the surrounding bodies, &c.
that this kind of vessels takes up by a very irregular absorption, as
we shall see, except however that of the chyle, which is not made in a
continuous manner, which is subject to great intermissions, and which
at other times takes place with remarkable activity.

2d. The internal absorptions, on the contrary, every where correspond
with the analogous exhalations. Thus the absorbents take up, upon the
serous system, the serum, upon the cellular system the serum and fat,
upon the medullary system the marrow, upon the synovial system, the
synovia; fluids, all of which as we have seen, had been thrown out by
exhalation upon their respective surfaces, and had remained for an
instant upon them. These absorptions are made in a constant and regular
manner; it is in this that they differ from the preceding. The internal
absorbents, incessantly in action, take up in a given time the same
quantity of fluids; their action corresponds precisely with that of the
exhalants. Observe that there are two essential differences between the
external and internal absorptions; viz. that the one are exerted on the
one hand on fluids different from those exhaled upon their surfaces,
and that on the other they are subject to continual variations and
irregularities; whilst the others always take up the fluids exhaled
upon their surfaces, and are constant and regular, at least in a state
of health. I shall point out in the mucous and cutaneous, systems, the
cause of this important difference.

3d. As to the nutritive absorptions, we know much less of them than
the preceding; but nutrition evidently supposes them. There is in fact
in this function a double motion, one of composition, the other of
decomposition. No organ, no part of an organ is formed at one period
of the same elements that composed it at a former one. The ancients
thought, without positive proof, that the body was renewed every seven
years. Whatever may be the period of its renewal, we cannot deny that
it is continually composed and decomposed; now the exhalants perform
the first nutritive motion, the absorbents the second. Observe in
fact, that the internal substances never re-enter the circulation to be
afterwards thrown out, except by the way of the absorbents.

The nutritive absorptions differ then from the preceding, in this, that
the substance deposited by exhalation and taken up by them, remains in
the organs, makes a part of them, and contributes to their composition;
whilst the fluids with which the internal exhalations and absorptions
are concerned, after having been furnished by the one, and before being
taken up by the other, remain out of the organs, upon their surface or
in their cells, but do not make a part of their structure.

It is difficult perhaps to conceive how solid nutritive substances
can be absorbed by vessels so delicate. Hunter, to whom anatomy owes
much both as it respects the absorbents and their uses, has already
removed this objection. It may be added to what he has said, that the
distinction between solids and fluids is not substantial except when
they are in mass; but when they are considered as separate particles,
they do not differ; this is so true, that the same particle makes
alternately part of a solid and a fluid, as in water that is not frozen
and that which is, as in solid or melted lead, &c. Now the nutritive
substances are absorbed particle by particle; then the distinction of
fluid and solid is of no consequence in the function of absorption.

Since the origin of the absorbents is beyond the reach of our senses,
it is difficult, it is impossible even to determine the manner in which
they arise, the peculiar structure which distinguishes them at their
origin, their communications, &c. They undoubtedly differ essentially
according to the mucous, cutaneous, serous, synovial, cellular,
medullary surfaces to which they belong; undoubtedly the nutritive
absorbents differ remarkably from the others; but nothing can be proved
by inspection. What has not been said upon the villous coat of the
intestines considered as the origin of the lacteals, upon their small
bladders, upon the form of the pores of the peritoneum, the pleura,
&c. upon the cellular sponge? I shall not notice here these anatomical
hypotheses, which have been made by an abuse of the microscope, and
which besides, if they had any real foundation, would not lead to any
inference useful to science.

Do the absorbents arise from the capillary system? Judging by
injections, it would seem that they did, for many distinguished
anatomists, by forcing a fine injection through the arteries, have
filled the absorbents in the neighbourhood. I never saw any thing
similar to it myself, yet I am far from denying a fact attested by
Meckel. If many other experiments should confirm it, it would be
established incontestably, it is evident, that the origin of the
absorbents is in the capillary system, as the origin of the excretories
and exhalants are proved to be in the same system. Besides, the
phenomena of absorptions cannot give us any light upon the mode of the
origin of the absorbents.

Where they go off from the surfaces or the organs from which they
arise, the absorbents are extremely delicate; they elude all kinds of
injection. They appear to anastomose with each other, interlace, form a
complicated net-work, which contributes much to the structure of some
parts, especially of the serous membranes. We know however but little
of this interlacing. It is not until they have run a certain course,
that these vessels are cognizable by our senses, and that we can
consequently study them in a general manner.


II. _Course of the Absorbents._

The absorbents, arising from the different parts that we have pointed
out, go in different ways.

1st. In the extremities, they are divided immediately into two very
distinct courses, the one superficial, the other deep-seated. The
former accompanies at first the sub-cutaneous veins, then runs along
in their interstices; so that when injections have succeeded well,
the whole exterior of the limbs appears to be covered with a kind of
lymphatic net-work. The second goes along the muscular interstices,
principally in the course of the arteries and the veins. Both tend
towards the superior parts of the limbs. When the vessels arrive there,
they approximate each other, and are collected into a bundle, in
which they are fewer but larger than below, and which passes through
certain openings that lead them into the trunk; for example, those of
the superior extremities almost all terminate in the axilla, those
of the inferior in the groin and some in the ischiatic notch. Now as
it is a general rule, that every absorbent should pass through one
or more glands, nature has placed at these openings of communication
of the extremities with the trunk, a certain number of these glands.
Yet before arriving at them, some have already passed through similar
glands placed, in a less number, it is true, in the ham and the bend of
the arm. It is in the extremities that the absorbents run the longest
course without passing through glands.

2d. In the trunk, the absorbents take at first two courses, the one
sub-cutaneous, the other deep-seated, which is found upon the internal
surface of the parietes of the cavities, for example, between these
parietes and the peritoneum in the abdomen, between these parietes and
the pleura in the thorax. The first belongs especially to the fleshy
parietes and the abundant cellular texture that is found on them. The
second belongs to these parietes and the serous surface that lines
them. Besides these absorbents, each viscus contained in the preceding
cavities, has deep-seated and superficial ones; the first go into
the interior of the organ, we see the second on the surface. This
distinction is easily made upon the liver, the spleen, &c. The external
absorbents of the parietes of the trunk, run a long course without
meeting with glands. Those that are spread on the internal surface of
these parietes exhibit a similar arrangement. But those of the viscera
hardly come out of them, before they meet these glands, and pass
through a great number at a time, because they are very near each other.

3d. There are many absorbents upon the exterior of the cranium; but
anatomists have not yet found them in its cavity, which agrees perhaps
with the almost total absence of cellular texture in this cavity. There
are many on the face, superficially, in the muscular interstices, and
around the organs that occupy this region. They descend to the neck,
where they find in their course a very great number of glands which
they successively pass through.


_Form of the Absorbents in their course._

The absorbents differ essentially from the veins in this, that for a
great distance they keep of the same size. Whilst in the venous system
the vessels are constantly becoming larger, so that a branch can hardly
go a few inches without doubling its size, those in the absorbent
system remain for a long time the same. When injected these vessels
appear like long white threads running upon the organs.

It follows hence, 1st. that the lymph never circulates like the blood,
in considerable masses, but always in very fine streams; 2d. that the
absorbents are very numerous; for their number compensates for their
size; thus all the surfaces are covered with them, whilst they have
but few veins and those of considerable size; 3d. that the absorbent
system has not really the form of a tree, like the arterial and venous
systems; the manner of division is wholly different. The absorbents
are very commonly straight; when they are tortuous, their curves are
entirely unlike those of the veins or the arteries. In fact in these
last, when the tubes have become as fine as the absorbents, their
curves are brought near each other and are small in proportion to the
size of the vessel. On the contrary the windings of the absorbents are
great; the curves that result from them have often a very considerable
extent; they wind in long folds upon the extremities, when they are not
straight there.

Viewed externally, the absorbents are not always cylindrical.
When filled with injection, they often appear full of knots; this
undoubtedly arises principally from the valves. Many authors have
represented them as a series of successive contractions; this is
however true only to a certain extent.

I have often seen in living animals, in dogs in particular, evident
dilatations, a kind of little bladders in the course of a lymphatic,
containing serum. It is upon the concave surface of the liver and
the gall-bladder, that I have most often observed them. When these
bladders are pricked with a lancet, the fluid flows out and they
disappear immediately. In making experiments with other views, I once
saw two or three of these small dilatations in the neighbourhood of
the gall-bladder. Having suffered the liver to fall back, to examine
the intestines, I was astonished at not being able to find them an
instant after; they disappeared without doubt by the contraction of
the vessel. I would remark upon this subject, that the liver is the
organ upon which these vessels are best seen in living animals; but it
is necessary to examine its concave face the instant the abdomen is
opened; for the contact of the air by contracting them, soon prevents
their being distinguished.

Besides I believe that in no case are the absorbents as much distended
during life by serum, as they are by mercury from injections. When
these have succeeded well, we see upon many parts a net-work of very
evident vessels. On the contrary, most commonly nothing similar is to
be seen in living animals. With whatever promptness we examine most
of the surfaces which the serous membranes cover, surfaces that can
be laid bare without making the blood flow, nothing is seen, except
sometimes small transparent striæ, which soon disappear. Now it is
impossible that if the absorbents were as full during life, as they are
by injections, but what their transparency contrasted with the colour
of the surrounding parts, would render them evident. I have selected
however very large dogs, to try to see their course better. I believe
that injections double at least the diameter of these vessels.


_Of the Capacity of the Absorbents in their course._

The capacity of the absorbents is remarkably variable; it depends
entirely, in the dead body, on the state in which these vessels were
in the last moments. In subjects of the same stature and age, they are
sometimes very apparent, at others hardly visible. They are double,
treble even, in some dropsical patients, what they are in a natural
state. Many authors say that they have seen branches almost equal
to the thoracic duct, and larger than the trunk of the right side.
To be convinced of the extreme variety of the absorbents, without
the assistance of injections, take the lymphatic glands in different
places, then dissect carefully the parts in the neighbourhood; you
will easily find all the absorbents that go to them. Then you will be
able to satisfy yourself of the extreme variety of their size; we can
even in this way trace them far enough without injection. Sometimes
in order to find the end of the thoracic duct, I take a gland in the
neighbourhood of the second lumbar vertebra; thus following the empty
lymphatic tubes that go from it towards the canal, I find it without
difficulty.

When we are not in the habit of finding immediately the absorbents,
this method of searching for them by means of the glands, which are
always very evident, infallibly succeeds; it cannot be used it is true
in the extremities; but in the thorax and especially in the abdomen, it
is very convenient. For example, by taking the inguinal glands we can
trace these vessels to the thoracic duct, by injecting them, or even
without. Some authors have advised making an opening in the gland and
placing a tube in it; this rarely succeeds; it is much better to open
the vessels that go from the gland, at the place where they go off.

The absorbents usually flat in the dead body, because they are empty,
never exhibit in this state a diameter proportional to that which
injections give them; whatever may be the varieties of capacity, the
fluids that we force into them always increase this capacity. It is
this flattening after death, that often makes us in attempting to open
them with a lancet, cut through both their parietes, and thus render it
more difficult to inject them.

The best proof of the extreme variety of the capacity of the
absorbents, is the necessity of choosing particular bodies in order
to inject them, the very great difficulties that often take place in
finding them in some subjects, whilst they are seen immediately in
others, and can be traced in the inferior and superior extremities,
through the cellular texture, without having glands for a guide. It is
not necessary then, after what has been said, to consider the caliber
of the absorbent vessels in a determinate manner. Constantly varying,
according to the state of the lymph they contain, they have no standard
size to which we can refer their increase or diminution. This is the
peculiarity of all the extensible and contractile canals, like those in
the animal economy; it is that which prevents us from making any kind
of calculation of their capacity.

These varieties of the absorbents are not general as in the veins,
all the great trunks of which, for example, are simultaneously
dilated when there is an obstruction in the lungs. Here sometimes one
only, sometimes many branches enlarge; the others remain contracted.
Sometimes the dilatation is general in a part, very often there are
remarkable disproportions of capacity in the same vessel; it is double
in one place what it is in another, though it has not received branches.

Authors have been much puzzled to determine the capacity of the
thoracic duct. I believe it, for it is never found twice the same.
These varieties do not depend on the constitution of the subject, but
only on the functions, and the state in which these functions are
found at death. Whether it be dilated above, contracted in the middle,
exhibiting below a little bladder, called by some the reservoir of
the chyle, &c. are circumstances the greatest number of which vary
incessantly during life, according to the quantity, the nature of
the lymph, and the obstacles to its course in this or that part. We
find a hundred varieties of the thoracic duct and the absorbents in
a hundred different subjects. The same subject has perhaps undergone
these hundred varieties at the different periods of his life. If life
returned and was destroyed many times in the same man, the venous and
absorbent systems would exhibit a number of varieties equal to the
number of times he had died.

We see from these considerations to what are reduced all these minute
examinations of proportion in the capacity of the vessels, which fill
our books of physiology.

If we compare the amount of the veins with those of the absorbents, it
is difficult undoubtedly after what has been said, to form any precise
idea of it; but we can make approximations. Now the absorbents do not
appear hardly inferior to the veins; as to the branches, for example,
the whole of the lymphatics of the lower limbs, placed by the side of
the capacity of the venous trunks, does not appear much inferior to it.
So in all the other parts, the veins being larger, but the absorbents
more numerous, the disproportion is not very great.

From this it seems as if there would be but little difference between
the trunks that terminate the veins and those that are the terminations
of the exhalant system; however this difference is enormous, as we
shall see.


_Anastomoses of the Absorbents, in their course._

In the extremities, on the exterior of the trunk and the head, in
the intermuscular spaces, &c. the anastomoses are very evident. We
see branches of communication going from one absorbent to another;
so that we might often say that these vessels are bifurcated. But
this appearance is most usually deceptive; for each branch of the
bifurcation is almost always as large as the trunk.

Under the serous surfaces, as on the convex face of the liver, the
lungs, the spleen, &c. the anastomoses are infinitely more numerous; it
is a kind of net-work in the plates of authors; for I confess that I
have never injected this portion of the absorbent system.

The anastomoses of the absorbents are made, 1st. from one vessel to
another that is contiguous to it; 2d. from the sub-cutaneous divisions
to the intermuscular in the extremities, and in the organs, from the
sub-serous divisions to those that occupy the interior of these organs.
3d. They take place between the absorbents of the superior regions and
those of the inferior; 4th. between those that go to the thoracic duct
and those that go to the great lymphatic vessel of the right side, &c.

By these anastomoses we understand how a tube with mercury, being
placed in one absorbent, many others around it are filled. They are so
much the more necessary, in the system of which we are treating, as
the lymph is subject, like the black blood, to an infinite variety of
causes of delay in its course, from the want of an agent of impulse at
the origin of the absorbents.

Gravity, external motions, different compressions, &c. have upon the
motion of this fluid, the same influence as upon that of the veins;
gravity especially has much influence. We know that if the powers are
a little diminished after long diseases, too long standing renders the
legs œdematous; hence why they are always more swelled in the evening
than in the morning. As to compression, if it is only moderately great
and acts upon many absorbents, it also produces œdema. It is not
the size of the surface compressed that has an influence upon this
phenomenon; it is only the number of absorbents that pass through this
surface. Thus by the head of the humerus being in the axilla, the arm
is frequently made to swell, whilst more extensive compressions across
the deltoid muscle, where there are fewer absorbents, do not produce
this effect.

From these phenomena, it is necessary then that there should be the
same means to favour the lymphatic circulation, that there are to aid
the venous. These means are especially the anastomoses; it is by them
that the first of these circulations is continued, notwithstanding
all the external obstacles that our clothes in certain places create,
notwithstanding the different pressure that the organs make upon
each other. It is only when the whole of the absorbents of a part is
compressed, that the motion of the lymph is interrupted. Thus the womb
becoming very large in pregnancy, and pressing upon all those of the
lower extremities, these extremities become dropsical. I hardly know
any organ in the abdomen but this, which by its position can produce
these general infiltrations by compression. The liver and all the
other organs are not capable of producing a similar phenomenon. When
dropsy takes place from an affection of them, it is rather because the
functions of the exhalants are increased.


 _Remarks upon the Difference of Dropsies that are produced by the
 increase of exhalation, and those that are the effect of a diminution
 of absorption._

This leads to an observation that appears to me to be very important
in dropsies, viz. the determining when the defect of the action of the
absorbents produces them, and when they arise from the increase of that
of the exhalants.

1st. Whenever a tight ligature applied to a limb makes the lower part
swell, whenever too long standing, a perpendicular position of the
superior extremities, &c. produce the same effect, it is to be presumed
that the effusion depends upon the compression of the lymphatics, and
takes place then like venous dilatations in similar circumstances,
because the lymph finds it difficult to circulate. Here then is a case
in which the exhalants have nothing to do with the dropsy, which takes
place because the absorbents do not take up what the exhalants furnish.
If other causes, as a bruise, a wound, &c. diminish the activity of
the part, the absorbents directly weakened, are not able to take up
their fluids. So if their weakness is sympathetic, that is to say, if
it arises from the injury of another viscus, the same phenomenon will
be the result of it. In all these cases we find the absorbents much
dilated in the dead body: often they are even full of fluids.

2d. But in the organic affections to which dropsy succeeds, the
exhalants certainly in the greatest number of cases, pour out more
fluids than usual. The pleura is filled in phthisis, the skin is
then covered with night sweats, blood is raised, &c. These are the
exhalations which I have called passive. They are so abundant on the
serous surfaces, that if a puncture is made, the peritoneum often fills
again with such rapidity, that as much water is collected in a day,
as there would be in a month, if the exhalation was natural. I do not
say that the absorbents are not also affected in these cases; but the
principal cause of the dropsical effusions is certainly then in the
increased action of the exhalants. I could cite other examples, but
this is sufficient. Four years since I was engaged upon the absorbents;
I observed then that these vessels are not always very evident in
dropsical patients, notwithstanding what has been said by many authors,
and that very often we see them more easily in very thin subjects. I
had not then thought of this difference of dropsies; but in working
again upon this system for my Descriptive Anatomy, I think of comparing
the cases in which it is dilated and those in which it is not, with the
cause of the death.


III. _Termination of the Absorbents._

All the known absorbents unite into two principal trunks. One of
these, which is the thoracic duct, receives all those from the lower
extremities, abdomen, the greater part of the thorax, and those of the
left side of the superior parts. The other is formed by the union of
the absorbents of the right side of the superior parts, as well of the
head, as the extremities, and of some of those of the thorax. These
two principal trunks go into the vena cava superior; around them, many
smaller branches also terminate there.

If we examine but little the number of the absorbents distributed
in all the parts, it will be easily understood, how enormous the
disproportion of their capacity is with that of these two trunks. How
is it that all the serum contained upon the serous surfaces and in the
cellular texture, that all the residuum of nutrition, that all the fat,
the medullary fluid, and synovia, that all the drinks, all the product
of the solid aliments that constantly enter the circulation, can pass,
in order to get there, through vessels so small? This observation has
struck all authors; and it is, I confess, very difficult to explain.
In fact, 1st. When there is a disproportion in the capacity of the
blood vessels, it is compensated for by an increase of velocity where
the caliber is less; thus, though the capacity of the veins exceeds
that of the pulmonary artery, still all the blood of the first passes
through the second. Now if we examine in a dog the thoracic duct during
digestion, which can easily be done by opening quickly the thorax on
the right side, raising the lungs of that side, and by cutting the
pleura along the aorta, which allows you to see immediately this canal
then very white on account of the chyle that is passing through it, if,
I say, we examine the thoracic duct in action, we shall see that the
circulation goes on there nearly as in the veins. By opening it then,
a more powerful throw of fluid does not indicate a greater velocity
than that of the venous blood. 2d. It might perhaps be said that during
life the thoracic duct is sufficiently dilated to correspond to all the
absorbents; but observation proves precisely the contrary. The thoracic
duct, full of chyle, is undoubtedly a little more dilated than in the
dead body; but I have satisfied myself repeatedly that the difference
is not very great. 3d. By supposing that a great quantity of fluids
passes through the thoracic duct, notwithstanding its size, the vena
cava superior ought to be proportionably dilated between it and the
heart; yet it continues nearly of the same size after having received
this canal. 4th. Hewson, by taking the fluid of the lymphatics, has
proved that it was analogous to that of the serous surfaces; its
transparency, when examined in the vessels of a living animal, makes me
also believe it, though this would not be a conclusive reason. How can
a fluid of the same kind, result from the combination of such different
elements, viz. of those which compose the mucous, cutaneous, nutritive,
fatty absorptions, &c.

I confess that the different substances that enter the black blood by
the thoracic duct and the one corresponding to it, may enter it at
different times; that the lymph, the fat, the chyle can each have their
time of passing. But first this explanation is not supported by any
fact, and the disproportion would also then be very great.

Many distinguished anatomists have thought that the veins absorb,
and in relation, to their use, they have joined these vessels to the
lymphatics. Haller, Meckel, and before them, Kaw Boerhaave, were of
this opinion. Such names deserve undoubtedly an examination of the
reasons advanced; let us now consider these reasons. 1st. The thoracic
duct has been seen obliterated, and absorption continuing to go on,
while life was preserved in the animal. But as they have not observed
whether the great right lymphatic and its accessories were obliterated,
nothing can be concluded from this fact. Besides the observations upon
this point do not appear to me to be well ascertained. They could
decide this question very easily, I think, by tying during digestion,
the thoracic duct at its entrance into the jugular; it could be
readily come at on the inferior part of the neck, where it could be
distinguished by its whiteness; no important part need be wounded.
This experiment would throw great light upon the general question of
absorptions. 2d. Fine injections, made through the mesenteric vein,
cover the peritoneum; hence it has been concluded that the absorbents
terminate in this vein. But as the venous extremities communicate
with the capillary system, and as this gives rise to the exhalants,
injections, by going through its numerous anastomoses, can easily be
spread in this way, which vitality shuts during life, but which the
flaccidity of the parts and the absence of sensibility open after
death. 3d. Compression of the superficial veins produces swelling of
the limbs; but as this compression is made at the same time upon the
absorbents, no inference respecting venous absorption can be drawn from
it. 4th. Kaw Boerhaave having introduced water into the intestinal
canal, it was afterwards found in the mesenteric veins; but this
experiment has been many times repeated since without giving the same
result. 5th. Add to these considerations the numerous experiments of
Dr. Hunter, to prove that venous absorption does not take place on the
surface of the intestines, and you will see that this absorption will
appear very uncertain, in these first respects.

But if you look at the question in other respects, you will be unable
to deny that certain facts present probabilities in favour of this
absorption. 1st. It is almost certain, that the venous extremities
take up by the way of absorption, the blood effused in the corpus
cavernosum. 2d. We do not see absorbents in the placenta, and yet the
umbilical vein takes up all the fluids of this body. 3d. Meckel having
injected a lymphatic vessel that went to a gland, the injected mercury
passed into a neighbouring vein.

All these observations throw great obscurity upon the termination of
the absorbents. I think that if on the one hand, we cannot doubt that
the greatest number of these vessels, those especially that come from
the serous surfaces, from the cellular texture, from the intestines,
have known terminations, we ought on the other to suspend our judgment
as to the manner in which the others terminate, and that the question
must remain wholly undecided upon this point, till it has been settled
by new experiments. Here, as in so many other points, physiology
has need of great light. 1st. The enormous disproportion between
the absorbents and their common trunks; 2d, the impossibility of
understanding from the analogy of the veins, the lymphatic circulation,
with the apparatus that injections exhibit as its vessels; 3d, many
probabilities against and many in favour of venous absorption; 4th, no
other known way for the fluids which enter the blood by the absorbents,
than the trunks noticed above. There is nothing but obscurity and
contradiction in the different data which would assist us to resolve
this problem.


IV. _Structure of the Absorbents._

This structure, capable only of being seen in the great trunks,
the thoracic duct, for example, presents us at first in its common
organization, a layer of dense cellular texture, of the same nature
as that of which we have already so often spoken, of which we shall
speak again, and which is found around the arteries, the veins, the
excretories, under the mucous surfaces, &c. &c. This filamentous
texture, connected only to a certain degree with the vessel,
strengthens it however much, by surrounding it with an external
membrane superadded to that which is peculiar to it. If, as Cruikshank
has done, we turn this duct inside out, and introduce into it a tube of
glass of a diameter a little larger than its own, this last membrane
will break. It is as in the arteries, in which a ligature cuts the
internal membrane and not the cellular. The same phenomenon takes place
from inflation; a much greater effort is necessary then to break the
cellular texture, than to rupture the peculiar membrane of the thoracic
duct.

No fleshy fibre is observed, in an evident manner at least, in the
absorbents. Some authors have admitted that they were there, but
injection contradicts them, even as it regards the thoracic duct. Blood
vessels probably run over the parietes of the absorbents; in ordinary
injections they are often very conspicuous on the thoracic duct. We
know not if there are nerves there; there is but little appearance of
them, if we may judge by the analogy of the veins, which have a great
relation in structure with these vessels.

The internal membrane which forms the peculiar texture of the
absorbents is continuous with that of the veins, and forms with it an
uninterrupted series of small tubes. Delicate, transparent, it is
moistened in the dead body by an unctuous fluid, which is, I believe,
unknown to it in the living, as that of the arteries is to those
vessels. It adheres to the external membrane by a compact cellular
texture, which, as in the veins, is rarely subject to ossification.
Mascagni has however mentioned an instance of it in the absorbents of
the pelvis. But there is another affection analogous to this, which
I have already seen many times in this kind of vessels. Their cavity
often contains a white matter, like plaster, especially on the external
surface of the lungs. Then without any preparation, the absorbents
exhibit almost the appearance which they have when mercury fills them.

The peculiar membrane, forms by its folds, valves similar to those of
the veins, but much more numerous. We find these united two by two,
rarely one exists alone. They leave between them small intervals, very
variable however in extent. Hence it happens that the thoracic duct
can sometimes be injected from above below through its whole extent,
sometimes it receives the fluid only in a short space, according as
the valves are more or less numerous in its cavity; which depends also
much on the relation of their width to the caliber of the vessel, a
relation which varies from the same causes as those assigned for the
veins. Hence it happens, that an absorbent filled with injection does
or does not exhibit in great number those knots, which, as we have
said, indicate valves. Wherever a branch is united to a trunk two of
these folds exist at the place of their junction. This is remarkable
especially in the thoracic duct, which injected from above, presents
a dilatation at the origin of each branch, because in this place the
valves are opposed to the fluid. Not numerous in the superficial system
of the organs covered by the serous membranes, as upon the convexity
of the lungs, and the spleen, they easily allow the passage of the
mercury from one division to another, and their ordinary functions are
supplied there by the great number of the anastomoses.

Their use is the same as in the veins, viz. to permit the ascent of
the fluid, and to prevent its return; but they do not always fully
do this. Injection often without difficulty overcomes some of them.
In dropsies, in which the absorbents are full, if we raise the skin,
we easily distinguish these vessels by their transparency; but soon,
notwithstanding their valves, they become empty, and then cease to be
visible. Different anatomists have forced air, and even other fluids,
into a great number of the lymphatics, by means of the thoracic duct,
and consequently in an opposite direction to their valves. All these
phenomena do not suppose in these vessels, as in their common duct,
varieties in the structure of the valves, in their width, &c. but only
different degrees of dilatation and contraction, degrees that are, as
I have said, independent of structure. In dilatation, the valves close
the caliber less than in contraction.

The valves of the absorbents have the same form and the same
arrangement as those of the veins; they partake, by their constant
exemption from ossification, of the general character of the membrane
from which they arise, and which, by folding, forms them.


ARTICLE SECOND.

LYMPHATIC GLANDS.


I. _Situation, Size, Forms, &c._

These glands are scattered in the different parts in greater or less
number. In the superior and inferior extremities, we find but a small
number, except at the upper parts, the axilla and the groin. In the
ham and at the elbow there are some, and there are engravings of them
at the instep. But upon the arm, the leg, the thigh, the fore-arm, &c.
they are not found. It is about the articulations that all are met
with; in this respect, we can say, that they are constantly increasing
from the inferior to the superior, no doubt because in ascending the
number of absorbents is continually increasing.

Not numerous on the cranium, they are only on the exterior of this
cavity, no one has ever, I believe, been found within it; which proves,
perhaps, that it is not the tenuity of the absorbents that conceals
them from us there, but that it is because they are of a peculiar
nature and different from that of the others. The face contains many of
these glands, especially along the stenonian duct, upon the buccinator,
&c.

As to the trunk, if we take the vertebral column for a term of
comparison, we shall see that there are but very few lymphatic glands,
hardly any at its posterior part, and that they are very numerous
anteriorly. On the neck, the jugulars are accompanied by a great series
of these glands. In the thorax, the posterior mediastinum contains many
of them. In the abdomen, they are abundant along the vertebral column,
behind the mesentery.

The whole interior of the thoracic and abdominal cavities, considered
otherwise than as it respects the spine, is also furnished with
them. They are very near each other in the mesentery, at the root of
the lungs, around the bronchiæ and in the pelvis. We see from this
arrangement, that, 1st. the lymphatic glands are found in general more
numerous in the places where the cellular texture predominates, in
which they are, as it were, buried, a remarkable relation for which
we are unable to assign precisely the reason. There are but few parts
abounding with this texture, that do not also abound with lymphatic
glands, and reciprocally there are none of these glands where it is
wanting. 2d. We see also that the parts the most distant from the
common trunks of the absorbents, as the extremities, the head, the
back, &c. are less provided with these glands; that the nearer we
approach these common trunks, the more numerous they become; so that
we might say that they form around them a sort of boundary, which
separates them from the secondary absorbents, and which at the same
time makes them communicate with them.

The size of the lymphatic glands, is variable, from the tenth of a
line in diameter, to the size of a hazle-nut, and even larger. They
are oftentimes so small that we can with difficulty discover them, and
they cannot sometimes be seen until disease has developed them. Their
increase in size is an ordinary effect of scrophulous affections,
which often show us lymphatic glands in places where we did not know
that they existed, especially on certain parts of the face and neck.
We cannot say then that the swellings of the cellular texture deceive
us; for the comparison of these bodies, which are thus made evident by
the disease, and which no doubt pre-existed, with the known lymphatic
glands, and which are then found equally swelled, proves their perfect
identity. All exhibit either the same fatty and white substance, or the
same caseous pus, according to the period of the disease.

In general these glands are much developed in childhood, diminish in
the adult, and almost disappear in old age. They are, it appears to
me, a little more evident in women than in men, in the phlegmatic
temperaments than in the sanguine. Of all the different enlargements of
which they are capable in different places, the tabes mesenterica gives
them the greatest size.

Their form, sometimes oval, sometimes more or less elongated, always
tending to a round one, which is generally that to which all the organs
of animals, and even all those of organized bodies are disposed; whilst
those of inorganic bodies assume those of cubes, prisms, &c.

The lymphatic glands, sometimes insulated as in the extremities of the
limbs, collect in greater number as they approach their common trunks.
The axilla and the groin contain many of them, as I have already said;
but in the abdomen, they are united in a group, and are so close to
each other in the mesentery, that they have appeared to Azelli to form
in this place, not an union of organs, but a single one, which he has
taken for a second pancreas, and to which he has given his name.


II. _Organization._

The colour of these glands, reddish in childhood, grey in the adult,
becomes of a yellowish tinge in old age, and has that subsidence and
flaccidity which then characterize almost all the organs. This colour
varies also according to the regions; thus the bronchial glands have
a black appearance, inherent in part in their structure, but owing
probably also to the fluid that they contain, as the appearance of this
fluid proves, when it is pressed out of a divided gland. This colour
does not depend on its proximity to the lungs and on their colour,
though we know, they have many black spots upon them; the proof of this
is, that I have already very often found the lumbar, mesenteric glands,
&c. also black. Yet there is no part in which this colour would be
more common than around the lungs. Cruikshank, in order to prove the
passage of the lymphatics through the glands, says that he has found
those in the neighbourhood of the liver yellow in jaundice, in which
it is very probable that there is absorption of bile. But this remark
is unimportant, since all the parts of the body, without exception,
exhibit, in this affection, this colour, which is only a little more
evident in the cellular parts.

We cannot deny however but that these glands often take a colour
similar to that of the fluid which fills the absorbents, either in a
natural state, or in injections, on account of the great number of
vascular divisions that penetrate them internally. During digestion, at
the moment the lacteals are transmitting chyle, the mesenteric vessels
become almost as white as this fluid, and soon lose this colour when
the transmission is finished. By filling the absorbent system with
mercury, the same phenomenon is observed.


_Common Parts._

The structure of the lymphatic glands, considered in its common parts,
is as follows; a very abundant, extensible, loose cellular texture
surrounds them, allows them to be moved and easily displaced by the
finger when pushed against them. Hence the remarkable mobility of most
of these organs, in the first periods of their swelling; in which this
texture does not then participate; for it is gradually affected, loses
its laxity, and then adhesion succeeds to mobility. Thus in cancer,
the glands are first rolling, and afterwards become fixed. In acute
inflammations, they are in general fixed, because the neighbouring
texture partakes almost always of the disease.

The cellular texture forms besides around the glands a thick membrane
which more immediately envelops them, and which deprived of fat and
serum, exhibits the nature of the cellular covering of the absorbents.
It is this last membrane which, in the ordinary state, gives to the
glands an appearance in general smooth and polished; for mercurial
injections develop in them some roughness, owing to the prominence
of the vessels that run through them in the interior. Some slight
depressions are also visible on their surface; they are to these
glands, what the furrows on their concave face, are to the liver,
the spleen and the lungs; it is through them that the vessels enter.
We might think that the arteries were very numerous in the lymphatic
glands, if we judged from injections which colour the whole of them,
if they are fine and adroitly used; but little reliance should be
placed upon this. Simple inspection, in a living animal, which is
infinitely more certain, does not discover much blood in these glands.
In the fœtus and in childhood, the quantity of this fluid is much more
considerable; hence in part the redness that characterizes these organs
at this period of life. We are ignorant whether nerves exist in them,
and whether any of the numerous branches that the ganglions send in
their neighbourhood, especially in the mesentery, are introduced into
their texture; I have never traced any of them there.


_Peculiar Texture._

The peculiar substance of the lymphatic glands exhibits a pulp
very analogous to that of the nervous ganglions. No fibre can be
distinguished in them. Soft in the fœtus, withered in the few glands
that remain in old age, this substance, is particularly altered, as
I shall say, by scrophulous diseases, and by the influence of the
affections of the neighbouring organs.

This peculiar texture has a greater or less density. We find it more
solid, and resisting better the injection of mercury in the superficial
glands than in the deep-seated. They have cells at short distances,
especially in childhood; they contain a whitish fluid, which disappears
as well as the cells themselves, at an advanced age. This fluid, of a
very peculiar nature, can only be compared with those of the thyroid
and thymus glands, which, like this, are found as it were extravasated,
in the interstices of the organs that separate them, they have no
reservoirs, and their use is wholly unknown. There is no doubt that the
great quantity of blood that enters the lymphatic glands in childhood,
is owing to the superabundance of this fluid. Sometimes in the adult,
there is a great quantity of it in the bronchial glands, where it
is of a blackish colour. Some physiologists have thought, without
anatomical proof, that it is spread out upon the bronchiæ, and that
it forms in part the black spittle that is thrown out in the morning.
Fourcroy in particular is of this opinion; he attaches importance to
the black colour of these glands, which are perhaps, according to him,
the reservoir of the carbonaceous matter of the blood. The fact is,
they belong to the lymphatic system; that in a great number of subjects
they are grey or red; that we do not know that they have an excretory;
that their texture is pulpy like that of the analogous glands; and that
their size distinguishes them however from all others. I have observed
that the acids, the alkalis and stewing, alter but little their black
colour and that of the fluid contained in them.

It is in the peculiar texture of the lymphatic glands that the
absorbents ramify, after being introduced there in a certain number,
and each with numerous ramifications, and afterwards go out by many
other branches which also give rise to an infinity of smaller ones.
Each gland may in this respect be considered as the centre of two
small opposite capillary systems, which anastomose with each other.
In the interior of these glands, these branches very tortuous, folded
upon themselves in different ways, occupy a great part of the peculiar
texture of these organs which many thought in consequence were nothing
but an interlacing of the absorbents; an idea that is not proved, since
this texture is not yet well known.

I have observed that it is susceptible of less horny hardening than
most of the other animal textures. It approximates in this respect that
of the true glands; but it differs in this, that instead of continuing
to harden by long continued boiling, it soon softens, becomes pulpy,
and breaks with great ease under the finger. The acids after having
crisped it, dissolve it also more easily than many of the other
textures; the sulphuric and muriatic are remarkable for this. Exposed
to the action of the alkalis, it loses some of its principles, which
weaken these menstrua; but it is never entirely dissolved.


ARTICLE THIRD.


PROPERTIES OF THE ABSORBENT SYSTEM.

We shall consider in the same article the properties of the absorbent
vessels and those of their glands.


I. _Properties of Texture._

Extensibility of texture exists in the absorbent system. 1st. The
thoracic duct is distended in an evident manner by injection, before
the rupture of its peculiar membrane takes place. 2d. I have said that
the absorbents examined around the serous membranes in a living animal,
principally in the liver, often exhibit little bladders or considerable
dilatations. Are these dilatations varices? is there an analogous
character in this respect, between the absorbents and the veins? I
know not; whatever they are, they can be very considerable in a long
absorbent vessel. 3d. When we tie the thoracic duct, not only that
swells, but the lymphatic vessels of the abdomen also dilate, and this
ligature is the most convenient means of observing the lacteals. This
extension has undoubtedly limits; carried too far, it would probably
produce in a natural state the rupture of the vessels, as happens
from injections. We have not yet any data founded upon observation
or experiment, respecting this rupture, though some authors have
endeavoured to explain by it the formation of most dropsies.

Contractility of texture is evident in the absorbent system. 1st. When
the thoracic duct is distended even in a recent dead body, and the
fluid is discharged by puncture, it immediately contracts. 2d. All the
absorbents contract also as soon as there is no more fluid in their
cavity. This phenomenon is remarkable during the absorption of chyle;
when that is finished, these vessels evidently disappear by the effect
of this contraction. 3d. The absorbent glands, swelled at the moment
chyle is passing through them, afterwards lose much of their size by
this contractile power.


II. _Vital Properties._

We have but few data concerning the animal properties of the
absorbents. Sensibility of relation does not appear to exist in them;
it is difficult to ascertain this by experiments. When we puncture
a lacteal when it is full of chyle, a lymphatic filled with serum
on the surface of the liver, or even the thoracic duct, the animal
gives no indication of pain. But what inference can be drawn under
circumstances, in which the abdomen being opened, the numerous painful
sensations would render nothing, comparatively, the slight sensation
which the puncture produced, admitting that it existed? No experiment,
I believe, has yet been attempted to ascertain if irritation carried to
the interior of these vessels produces a sensible effect. Probably the
same result would be obtained by fine injections used for this purpose,
as has been for the veins, considering the analogy of structure and the
continuity of the peculiar membrane of both systems.

There are circumstances however in which the absorbents have a very
acute sensibility, viz. when they are inflamed. It is a very frequent
phenomenon in diseases, that there is a very evident swelling and
redness, along the course of the sub-cutaneous absorbents in the lower
extremities, giving considerable pain to the patient, terminating
at the inguinal glands, or even extending beyond. In wounds with a
poisoned instrument, in the acute pains of a whitlow, &c. a very
painful sensation is often felt the whole length of the absorbents of
the superior extremities.

The lymphatic glands do not appear to enjoy, in a natural state, animal
sensibility, when they are irritated in different ways, which can
easily be done. But inflammation may develop it in these glands as in
the absorbents, by raising to a high degree their organic sensibility.
Thus the pain is very acute, when after a puncture made by an infected
instrument, after a sprain, &c. these glands swell. We know the extreme
suffering that arises from those in the axilla, when they swell and
suppuration succeeds. Shall I speak of the pains experienced from the
mesenteric glands when cancerous? Who is ignorant of those which buboes
occasion, &c.?

As to animal contractility, it is entirely wanting in the absorbents
and their glands.

The organic properties exhibit in the absorbent system, the following
arrangement. Sensible contractility has been allowed them by Haller.
It is founded upon this, that the lymphatics easily empty themselves
of the chyle that passes through them, and upon this also, that
by touching them with sulphuric acid, they crisp immediately. But
sulphuric acid, like all the concentrated acids and caloric, produces
the same effect upon all animal substances, even after death; it is the
horny hardening. When the absorbents, particularly the thoracic duct
are touched with the point of a scalpel, no contraction follows. If
they are capable of contracting upon themselves, it appears that it is
when they cease to be distended, and not when they are irritated; and
that it is consequently by their contractility of texture. The sensible
organic contractility is then at least doubtful in them, if it exists
it is very obscure and at most to be compared to that of the dartos
muscle.

The organic sensibility and the insensible organic contractility are
evidently found in the absorbents. It is by these properties that
they perform their functions, that fluids are absorbed by them, that
they circulate in their branches, &c. &c. These two properties are
remarkable in them in this, that they continue some time after death.
A fluid injected when the animal is still warm, is absorbed, either
on the serous or mucous surfaces. It is less easy in the cellular
texture. We can prolong a little this absorbent power, by supporting
the heat artificially by a bath. This has in general less efficacy than
I thought for a long time. Various recent experiments have convinced
me of this. This arises no doubt from the fact, that it is the vital
heat and not an artificial one, which is necessary to the exercise of
this function, or rather vital heat and absorption are two effects of
a common cause, viz. organic properties. As long as these properties
remain in the solids, they retain caloric and absorb. But the moment
they are gone, the heat goes and at the same time absorption ceases. It
would be useless to expose to caloric, solids that life had entirely
abandoned; they would become warm; but they could exhibit no vital
phenomenon. In the same way it would be useless to keep up the heat
of an animal recently killed, by making an artificial one succeed the
natural. It is organic sensibility and insensible contractility, that
must be prevented from escaping to prolong absorption. If artificial
heat keeps up this function, it is only by first keeping up these
properties. We cannot calculate upon absorption when the animal is
cold, though Mascagni and many others have said otherwise. I have in
vain attempted to keep it in action then; generally I have not observed
it above two hours after death. The organic sensibility is in relation
with many fluids in the absorbent system, and it is in this that it
differs from the other systems, the glandular, for example, which is
never in relation but with one particular fluid, and which rejects all
the others in a natural state. Water and other mild fluids can easily
be absorbed, though very different from the lymph. In the natural
state, the thoracic duct alternately admits chyle and lymph.


_Character of the Vital Properties._

From what has been said, it is evident that the organic properties
perform the principal part in the peculiar life of the absorbent
system. These properties are much more conspicuous there than in the
venous system; at least they are much more capable of being raised.
In fact there are ten inflammations of the absorbents for one of the
veins. This disposition to inflame from the least virus that passes
through their tubes, from pains, though not severe, that are felt at
their extremity, particularly characterizes these vessels. It is rare
that there is found in the course of a vein, those swellings, pains
and inflammations so frequent in the course of the absorbents. This
difference proves a diversity of structure in the peculiar membrane,
notwithstanding its continuity with that of the veins. In fact at the
period when experiments were made upon the transfusion of medicines
into them, authors have not related any case of venous inflammation
from the contact of foreign substances upon the membrane of the veins;
whilst practice frequently presents us this fact in the absorbents.

The lymphatic glands especially have a great tendency to inflammatory
swellings, when deleterious substances that are absorbed come in
contact with them. In the first periods these substances confine their
effects to the first glands they meet; thus the absorption of the
venereal virus hardly extends beyond the glands of the groin; thus
the axillaries alone swell when a puncture is made with an infected
instrument, &c.; the glands that follow, remain untouched.

Though much disposed to inflame, the lymphatic glands exhibit however
more slowness in this affection, than many other animal textures,
the cellular and cutaneous, for example. We know that phlegmon and
erysipelas go through their periods quicker, than the inflammations
of the inguinal, axillary glands, &c. The pain of which these
inflamed glands are the seat differs also much from that of these two
affections; it is more dull, obscure, &c. The pus is more slow in
forming; it resembles considerably cellular pus; it differs much from
that of erysipelas. There are few textures in the economy that are more
disposed than this to hardening after inflammation. For one single time
that the skin become scirrhous after erysipelas, the lymphatic glands
become so twenty. This is truly one of their distinctive characters.

The absorbents often exhibit to a certain degree, like their glands,
a character of slowness in the phenomena over which their organic
properties preside. For example, when concerned in a wound, they
contract, crisp up and close more slowly than the sanguineous
capillaries, that are then also concerned; hence the flow of serum
that continues for some minutes after that of blood has ceased.
This phenomenon is constant in small wounds. If the absorbents and
the capillaries had the same degree of insensible contractility, it
certainly would not take place.

Here then are new proofs of the principles of which we have every
instant occasion to present the consequences in this work; viz. that
the vitality peculiar to each system, the particular degree of vital
forces that characterize them, imprint upon all its affections a
peculiar tinge and aspect, if I may so express myself, unknown to all
the other systems.


_Differences of the Vital Properties in the Absorbent Vessels and their
Glands._

Though we have considered at the same time the vital properties in the
glands and in the absorbents, though anatomy shows the first to be an
assemblage of folds and vascular windings, yet it cannot be denied that
they have a peculiar kind of vitality, by which they are distinguished
from the absorbents that come to them. It is this peculiar kind that
exposes them to certain diseases of which the absorbents are not the
seat, at least not in so evident a manner. The scrophulous virus seems
more especially to attack them. They are particularly affected in
tabes mesenterica, strumous diseases, &c. In the innumerable swellings
of which they are the seat in consequence of organic diseases, the
absorbents do not appear at the same time altered in their texture. It
seems even that in a very great number of cases, the numerous folds
that these vessels form in the glands, do not partake of their organic
injury; they, in fact, transmit the lymph as usual. Nothing is more
common than to see abdominal and thoracic enlargements of these glands
in children, without producing serous effusions, even at the most
advanced periods. In opening the bodies of small subjects, I have often
been astonished at this phenomenon. The lymphatic vessels are not even
more dilated, at least we do not find them easier in children affected
with tabes mesenterica, than in others. We can hardly ever discover
them at this age to inject.


_Sympathies._

The absorbent system is much disposed to receive the sympathetic
influence of the other organs. This disposition relates, 1st, to the
glands; 2d, to the vessels themselves.

One of the phenomena which the examination of dead bodies perhaps
most often exhibits, is the swelling of the lymphatic glands from
the organic affections of the principal viscera. We observe this
phenomenon, 1st, in the neck from the affections of the thyroid gland
and sometimes of the larynx, in the jugular glands; 2d, on the
chest from cancer in the breast, in the axillary and often in the
mammary glands, from every kind of phthisis in those that surround
the bronchiæ, very rarely if ever from diseases of the heart, whether
aneurism, ossification or diseases of the valves; 3d, in the abdomen,
from cancerous diseases of the stomach, especially of the pylorus,
and most of those in which the texture of the liver is altered, in
the numerous glands that accompany the biliary vessels and those
surrounding the pancreas; from schirrus of the intestines, from their
cancers, which are in general rather rare, in the mesenteric glands;
from the affections of the womb, the rectum, and the bladder, in
the glands of the pelvis; from schirrus of the testicles, diseases
of the urethra, in the inguinal and lumbar glands, &c.; 4th, on the
superior extremities from punctures, bites and most of the inflammatory
affections in the axillary glands; 5th, on the inferior extremities
from many affections in the inguinal glands.

These swellings of the lymphatic glands are of the same nature as the
affection that produces them; if that is acute they are so, if chronic
they pursue the same course. The swelling of the glands in the axilla
is acute, if it is the consequence of a prick of the finger, of a
whitlow, &c. and chronic, if it arises from cancer.

I am far from considering all these different swellings as the result
of a sympathetic influence exerted upon the gland. No doubt the
conveyance of absorbed matter produces the effect, as happens when
there is some virus, punctures with poisoned instruments, &c. producing
the swelling. But sometimes also sympathy alone is the cause. When by
the acute pain that a whitlow, a splinter under the nail or a bruise of
the finger occasion, the axillary glands swell; when the same glands
swell from the effect of a blister applied to the arm or fore-arm, &c.;
when this phenomenon happens in the inguinal glands from a blister
on the thigh or the leg, of which I have seen many cases, &c. &c.
there is certainly no matter conveyed to the gland; it is an effect of
sympathy.

Most surgeons believe that every cancer in the breast, with swelled
glands, requires their extirpation. I believe that in some cases they
may become cancerous, but I doubt if this happens in the greatest
number. 1st. In old ulcerated cancers of the breast, they continue most
often swelled during the whole of life, without suppurating. 2d. After
operations, in which some deep seated ones have been left, we rarely
see them become cancerous. When the cancer is reproduced, it is the
wound that opens again. 3d. I have many times compared the texture of
a gland of the axilla enlarged by a cancer of the breast, with that of
the bronchial glands enlarged in phthisis, with that of the sub-hepatic
glands swollen from steatomatous tumours, hydatids of the liver, &c.
and I could discover no difference. 4th. Finally, all those who open
many dead bodies may be convinced that almost all the organic diseases
of the viscera which have many glands around them, are accompanied with
their enlargement, whatever may be the nature of those diseases. This
phenomenon struck me so much, that at one time attributed the effusions
which terminate almost all these organic diseases, to the difficulty
the lymph experiences in passing through these glands. But the
absence of these swellings in the diseases of the heart attended with
dropsy, the frequent absence of swelling of the superior extremities
when the axillary glands were enlarged, the tumefaction of the lower
parts, the glands of the superior being alone swelled, and many other
similar proofs, which made me consider the serous effusions that take
place then, as passive exhalations, analogous to those that produce
hemorrhages, did not permit me to adopt this first opinion.

It is essential to distinguish the swellings of the lymphatic glands by
the influence of the diseases of the neighbouring viscera, from those
which arise from tabes mesenterica and other analogous, scrophulous
diseases. 1st. In the latter case, the texture of the gland is always
primarily affected; it is only secondarily in the other. 2d. The one
from scrophulous affections appears exclusively in childhood; the other
at all ages. 3d. Finally, a gland swollen from the affection of another
organ, most frequently preserves a texture, and colour analogous to its
natural state. It is only in the last periods that the texture becomes
sometimes hard, like cartilage, and even suppurates; but it is not
with the same phenomena as the texture of the mesenteric and bronchial
glands swollen by scrophula. The appearance and structure are wholly
different. This last exhibits in this case a white substance which is
found in small quantity in the first periods; so that when we cut the
gland, we easily distinguish this substance from the texture of the
gland that remains, where it still exists, with its natural colour and
arrangement. In the latter periods, this white matter has encroached
upon the whole gland, the texture of which has disappeared. However in
phthisis, and sometimes, though more rarely, in cancers, the swelled
glands exhibit in consequence an analogous appearance; but in all the
other cases it is different.

We know that nature often chooses these glands in important fevers, as
the place of the crisis. They are the seat of what are very improperly
called parotid tumours, in adynamic fevers.

The absorbents are, like their glands, influenced by the affections
of the neighbouring organs. I am well persuaded that the different
alterations which the absorption of chyle undergoes, the absorption
of the aqueous part of the bile and the urine, and the derangement
of those of the serous surfaces in many diseases, are effects purely
sympathetic. But it is not very easy to distinguish when they are
not so. There are certainly sympathetic absorptions, as there are
sympathetic exhalations and secretions.

On the other hand, the absorbent system being affected, the other
organs very often experience sympathetic influences. In tabes
mesenterica, and in the enlargement of the bronchial glands that
correspond with it, there are many symptoms that evidently arise from
the sympathetic relations that connect these glands to the other
organs. It is not my province to point out these symptoms.

As to the influence of the diseases of the absorbents upon the other
organs, we know but little of it. When their course is inflamed from a
puncture, from a wound with an instrument having on it some virus, &c.
there are often vomitings, diarrhœa, &c.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

OF ABSORPTION.


I. _Influence of the Vital Forces upon this Function._

The functions of the absorbents are not at the present day a subject
of doubt with any anatomist; but the manner in which these functions
are performed, are far from being so well agreed upon. The first
idea has been to compare the action of the absorbents with that of
capillary tubes. But if we reflect a little upon this action, it is
easy to see that these phenomena are wholly different from those of
inert, capillary tubes. I think that we never should be able to say
precisely, how an absorbent orifice, being immersed in a fluid, takes
it up, seizes its particles and makes them ascend in its tube. But what
is undoubted in absorption is that the vessels derive this faculty
from the vital forces which they have; that it is only the relation
existing between the particular kind of organic sensibility with which
they are endowed, and the fluids with which they are in contact, that
is the immediate cause of the phenomenon. Do you wish numerous proofs
of this? See the lacteals choosing only chyle from among the variety
of matter contained in the intestinal canal; see the absorbents of the
bladder and the gall-bladder leaving many of the elements of the urine
and the bile, to take only the aqueous part of these fluids; see the
cutaneous absorbents, the mucous ones of the bronchiæ, &c. selecting
only certain principles from the air and leaving others. Often inactive
for a long time, they immediately recommence action when any substances
in relation with their sensibility are presented to them. Observe the
fluids injected or effused into the cellular texture, they are taken
up or left by the absorbents of this texture, disappear promptly, or
remain and occasion suppuration, according as they agree with or are
repugnant to their sensibility.

We cannot deny that in the natural state the sensibility of the
absorbents has a particular type, to which certain substances are
alone accommodated, and which alone on this account can be absorbed.
The exercise of the organic sensibility then always pre-exists in
absorption, as it does in secretion, nutrition, &c. Thus in the
physical phenomena, the exercise of gravity always precedes the fall of
heavy bodies. Thus the power of attracting is put into exercise before
the motion of the planets takes place, &c. &c.


II. _Varieties of Absorption._

It follows from what I have said, that whenever the organic sensibility
of the absorbents is altered in any way, absorption must necessarily
experience a corresponding derangement; now this is what constantly
happens. Serum often bathes for whole months the absorbent orifices,
in dropsy, without raising their sensibility sufficiently to be taken
up by them. Let any cause increase this property, instantly absorption
takes place. Observe some indolent tumours which remain for a long
time in the same state by the stagnation of their fluids, they are
immediately discussed when certain medicines applied to them rouse the
dormant sensibility of their absorbents. Discutients do not act upon
the fluids themselves; they do not attenuate, or cut them, according
to the vague language of physicians, but by changing the degree of
force of the absorbents, they render them able to act. It is so true
that it is in this way that different resolutions are effected, that
often a slight degree of inflammation is previously necessary to their
development; all surgeons know this. Desault did not consider most of
the swellings of the testicles as an obstacle to the operation for
hydrocele by injection. On the contrary it often happened, that after
the irritation produced in the testicles by the surrounding membrane,
the enlargement disappeared, which was only kept up by the want of
energy in the absorbents.

The alterations of organic sensibility can diminish, increase, or
variously modify this property. Let us cease to wonder then at the
extreme variety of the absorptions; let us not be astonished, if many
fluids, besides those ordinarily taken up, can pass into the blood
by the absorbents; if the bile, the urine, the mucous fluids, which
are usually rejected, can enter the circulation; if the blood effused
in the cellular texture is taken up by these vessels. The forces of
life impress, by their extreme variety, the same character on all the
functions over which they preside.

Much has been said of putrid matters passing into the blood, and there
serving as a cause for diseases. This infection of the blood has
undoubtedly been exaggerated; but I am convinced that in many cases it
is real. Why are the colour, consistence, odour, and nature of the
excrements so very variable? If the same substances are always absorbed
from the aliments, it is evident that the residue of these aliments
would always be the same. Observe the innumerable varieties of the
urine, the bile, the mucous fluids, &c. according to the difference
of the principles that concur to form them. Why should not the chyle
present the same variations? it would be the only fluid of its kind
in the animal economy if it did not change under many circumstances.
Now, whence can these changes come, if not from this, that the lacteals
present numberless varieties in their organic sensibility, varieties,
each of which admits only certain principles and rejects the others?

The absorption of the lacteals, which, in an ordinary state, introduces
into the blood only nutritive substances, can then often be a way open
for the admission of many morbific principles. Thus in the lungs, the
vessels which take from the air the substances proper to colour the
blood, often draw in principles injurious to their functions, according
to the different alterations that their sensibility can experience.

In the ordinary state, the kind of organic sensibility and of tone of
the cutaneous and mucous absorbents, shuts out all external substances
that are hurtful. But when this kind is changed, the way can in an
instant be open to them. Does not pus remain without mischief on the
cellular texture, in most wounds? Let an imprudent application raise
there a little the forces of the absorbents, it is taken up by them;
the ulcer dries up; the pus passes into the blood; and then follows the
whole sad train of the symptoms of re-absorption which commences.

We can say, that a thousand channels are incessantly open in our
organs, to morbific principles. The organic sensibility, placed as a
sentinel at their mouths, indicates according to the manner in which
it is affected, to the insensible contractility when it is necessary to
open or shut them.

It is exhalation that contributes to the formation of most tumours; it
is absorption that serves for their cure.

If I were to run over the phenomena of absorption in the different
ages, sexes, seasons and climates, I could show constantly the
differences of organic sensibility always preceding the differences of
this function. I shall speak of them in the different ages.

The causes that vary the natural type of the sensibility of the
absorbents, are, as in all the other functions, direct or sympathetic;
1st, direct, as when by previous friction on the skin, we excite the
absorbents, and force them to act, which they would not have done
without this; 2d, sympathetic, as when the absorbents, feeling the
affection of a distant viscus, increase or diminish their action,
according to the kind of influence they receive. We have spoken of this
phenomenon in the sympathies of the different systems.


III. _Motion of the Fluids in the Absorbents._

The fluids once absorbed on the different surfaces of which we have
spoken, are carried by a successive motion to the common trunks, which
transmit them to the black blood.

We know not the laws of this motion. It is evident from many
observations formerly made, that it has much analogy with the motion
of the venous blood; but it is also distinguished from it by some
differences.

It appears to be in general more slow. The thoracic duct opened when it
is full of chyle, does not throw out its fluid as far as a vein of the
same size.

The motion of the lymph does not seem to be subject to a reflux in the
neighbourhood of the heart, like the venous blood. For example, the
venæ cavæ, jugulars, &c. are so much the more dilated, in proportion
to the obstacles the lungs have opposed to the return of the blood.
Now in injecting the thoracic duct, I have never observed between its
dilatation and contraction, and the state of the pulmonary organ, any
kind of relation. On the other hand, we never find this duct full
of lymph, as we find the veins full of blood, when an obstacle has
interrupted the motions of the fluid in the last moments.

How happens it, that in the reflux that produces the venous pulse of
the jugulars, the blood does not enter into either absorbent trunk? The
valves, arranged to prevent the entrance of that, which in a natural
state, flows towards the heart, are evidently useless here. We can
clearly attribute this phenomenon only to the relation existing between
the orifice of these trunks and the black blood, as the orifice of the
larynx, foreign by its vitality to external bodies, repulses every
fluid but the air. Blood is never found in the thoracic duct.

There is in the venous blood an evident continuity of motion, from the
capillary system to the heart; it is from this system that it goes,
to be propagated, if we may so say, to that organ. The motion of the
lymph, on the contrary, is incessantly interrupted by glands, each
of which, as I have said, exhibits really in relation to the vessels
that enter and go out of it, a small capillary system. At each gland
the motion necessarily changes its impulse; now as the state of these
glands is susceptible of many varieties, we can easily conceive,
that the motion of the fluids circulating in the absorbent system,
necessarily presents a great number of them; that it may be rapid
in one part, very slow in another, regular here, there irregular,
&c. Hence we must not be surprised if we find some absorbent vessels
dilated, whilst those of the neighbourhood are hardly perceptible.
There is indeed a kind of variety in the veins, but it always has its
source in the origin of these vessels, and never in their course, as
takes place in the absorbents.

The continuity of the venous blood and the frequent interruptions of
the lymph should establish differences not only between the motions of
the two kinds of vessels, but also in the composition of the fluids.
The first is necessarily everywhere the same; the second may vary at
every gland, and take new modifications at each of those through which
it passes.

I should be disposed to think that the insensible contraction of which
the small capillary system of each gland is capable, would aid the
motion of the lymph, by diminishing the course that this fluid must
take, without a new impulse, from the origin of the absorbents to the
black blood, if these organs were wanting. In fact, we know that in the
extremities where there are much fewer glands, there are more frequent
effusions than in the trunk where the absorbents pass through them at
every instant; I speak of those effusions which ought evidently to be
attributed to the want of circulation of the lymph, as those arising
from compression, too long standing, &c. and not those that depend on
an increased exhalation, like those after organic affections.

We see, from what I have said thus far, that we have only a few
disconnected views upon the motion of the lymph; that of the veins,
though still requiring much research, is yet more known; but in order
to give a perfect knowledge of these subjects, the first especially,
many experiments and much further labour are necessary.


IV. _Of Absorption in the different Ages._

In the fœtus and in childhood, absorption relative to nutrition is not
in proportion to exhalation. Many substances remain in the organs, but
few go out, hence there is growth.

But little is known of the differences which the internal absorptions
of synovia, serum, fat, marrow, &c. then present.

The external absorptions appear to be more active, for we know that
contagions are taken with much more facility in the first age. We
know not however whether the skin and mucous surfaces then constantly
introduce more foreign substances into the body, or if they are only
more disposed to introduce them.

We are deficient in positive data as to the state in which absorption
is found in childhood. To judge of it however by that of the lymphatic
glands, it would appear that it was very energetic. In fact these
glands are in proportion much developed; they appear to be the seat of
very active functions; they have a peculiar life more developed than
afterwards, hence a greater disposition to diseases. We know that until
puberty, or rather until the end of growth, they are the seat of many
affections which entirely disappear after that age, and lessen the
numerous series of those to which we are exposed.

This double circumstance, 1st, the precocious and proportionably great
development of the lymphatic glands in childhood; 2d, their very great
disposition to diseases, indicates certainly remarkable activity in
their functions; for it supposes a great development of the vital
forces; now these vital forces being more developed ought necessarily
to preside over more energetic functions. See in fact the organs
whose functions we know, which are on the one hand much developed in
childhood, and on the other much disposed to diseases; the functions
of these organs are more active. Thus the brain and nerves being more
developed, have more sensibility; thus the vessels with red blood have
an activity of nutrition, in proportion to their size, &c. In youth,
it is when the genital organs are more developed and they become more
exposed to diseases, that their functions are greater. Examine all
the organs and their functions, you will see that a general law of
the economy is, that these three things, 1st, great development; 2d,
greater disposition to diseases; 3d, greater activity of functions, are
constantly united. Now when these two first exist in the glands of the
absorbents, we ought to conclude that the third is there also, though
we are not certain of it, since, from what I have said, we are ignorant
of the uses of these small organs. Grimaud has considered them, it is
true, as essential to nutrition; he even calls the nutritive system
the combination of these glands and the cellular texture, a gratuitous
supposition, which is not proved. All that we know upon this point, is
that on the one hand nutrition, and the development of these glands on
the other, are very great in the fœtus. But does it follow from this,
that the first phenomenon proceeds from the second? Undoubtedly not;
no more than because the brain, the liver, &c. are early developed in
the fœtus, and nutrition is very active, they should be considered as
the agents of this function. Besides, nutrition is a function that has
no particular organ for its centre and agent. Each organ is itself
the machine which separates from the blood or the fluids that enter
it, the nutritive materials that are suitable for it, and afterwards
appropriate them to itself. The muscle separates its fibrin, the bone
its phosphate of lime, &c. But one common and central organ does not
elaborate these nutritive materials, as one common viscus moves the
blood, as one central organ presides over sensibility, &c.

As to the anatomical state of the absorbents in the fœtus and
childhood, we can know but little; I do not know that any author has
injected them comparatively in this age and in the adult. I have but
one fact upon this point, it is that the lacteals, examined in an
experiment upon two young dogs, who had only left off sucking eight
days, appeared to me larger in proportion than at a more advanced age.
I will make one remark that has often struck me; it is that the size
of the animal has much less influence than would be thought upon the
diameter of these vessels. For example, an adult dog, twice as large
as another, has not by a great deal, vessels of double size. Accident
led me to examine them the same day, three years since, upon two large
grey-hounds, that were among the dogs brought to me, and upon one of
those vulgarly called cur dogs; they were nearly equal in all three;
this struck me.

We know but little of the different revolutions that absorption
undergoes in the ages that succeed infancy. Only there is no doubt that
puberty is the limit of this kind of predominance which the lymphatic
glands enjoyed in the economy. The age of their diseases is then
passed; often even these diseases, heretofore beyond the reach of art,
are spontaneously cured. The predominance of the genital organs which
succeeds to this and some others, those of the sensitive-organs, &c.
seems to destroy the germ which this first supported.

Soemmering has described in a particular work the part that the
absorbents perform in the different diseases of the adult and the other
ages. This part has appeared to me to be often very difficult to be
known, notwithstanding what he has said of it. I refer however to his
work on this point.

In old age, nutritive absorption continues very active; for it is that
which decomposes the body, which takes from it the substances that
nourish it, and which consequently withers and dries the organs.

The external absorptions, on the contrary, are feeble; the skin takes
with great difficulty the different contagions, as I shall say in
treating of this organ; the mucous surfaces absorb slowly; but little
chyle passes into the blood in proportion to what enters it in the
adult. The two absorptions, the nutritive and the external, are exactly
reversed at the two extreme ages of life; the second is superior to
the first in infancy, the first predominates in old age.

As to the internal absorptions, as those of synovia, of the serous
surfaces, of the cellular texture, &c. I should think that they
predominated in old age, and that to this was to be attributed the
numerous serous effusions which happen at that age, and which we
observe in dead bodies. We have not however upon this point so good
data as upon the other two.


V. _Preternatural Absorption._

We can understand two things by this expression; 1st, the absorption of
fluids different from those naturally taken by the absorbents, as that
of effused blood, &c. I have already spoken of this absorption; 2d,
that which takes place in the cysts which are developed contrary to the
natural order in the economy. Now this last exhibits a very singular
phenomenon, when compared with preternatural exhalation. It, in fact,
takes place with difficulty; it is rare that you see the fluids
of encysted tumours enter suddenly the circulation by absorption,
either in whole or in part, as this very often happens in the serous
collections of the peritoneum, which, without being cured, have many
alterations of increase and diminution. What physician has not observed
that the urine flows more as the abdomen becomes flat, and that it is
suppressed when it is filled?

Observe on the contrary, that exhalation is renewed with great facility
in encysted tumours; that if we empty them and do not remove their
cysts, they are soon reproduced, as I have said. Is it that the
absorbents are not developed in proportion to the exhalants in these
tumours? I know not; but the fact is not less certain; observation of
diseases proves it every day.




SYSTEMS PECULIAR TO CERTAIN APPARATUS.


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

The former part of this work has been devoted to researches upon
the systems common to the structure of all the apparatus, upon
the primitive systems, which form if we may so say the nutritive
parenchyma, the basis of all the organs, since there is hardly any one
of these organs in which the arteries, the veins, the exhalants, the
absorbents, the nerves and the cellular texture do not enter as a more
or less essential part. Each is at first a texture of these common
parts, then of other peculiar parts which particularly characterize
them.

The systems that will now be examined are not so generally extensive in
the animal economy. They belong only to some particular apparatus; thus
the osseous, the animal muscular, cartilaginous, and fibrous systems
are especially destined to the apparatus of locomotion; thus the
serous, mucous, and organic muscular systems enter especially into the
digestive, respiratory and circulatory apparatus; thus the glandular
system forms the apparatus of secretions, thus the cutaneous system
enters principally into the external, sensitive apparatus, &c.

All the systems that remain to be examined are then much more
insulated, perform a much less extensive part than those of which we
have been treating. Confined to certain apparatus, they are unknown
to the others, and have an independent life of their own, whereas the
primitive systems everywhere mingle their vitality with that of the
other organs, into whose composition they enter; most of them have
a kind of existence and external forms which distinguish them from
these last. The different parts which compose each, are almost always
insulated, not connected with each other; the bones, the muscles of
animal and organic life, the cartilages, the fibro-cartilages, the
medullary organs, the glands, the serous membranes, the hair, &c.
exhibit this insulation in a remarkable manner. Each portion belonging
to these different systems, has always between it and the other
portions of the same system many intermediate organs, which are of a
very different nature, and which consequently belong to other systems.
There are hardly any except the cutaneous, fibrous and mucous systems,
which are everywhere continuous in their different parts; yet this last
has no communication between that portion of it which is spread upon
the digestive and respiratory apparatus, and that which belongs to the
urinary and genital organs.

We have seen on the contrary that the primitive systems are everywhere
continuous, having no interruptions in them. The cellular, the
arterial, the venous, the absorbent, the nervous are so arranged, that
if it were possible to remove all the organs they enter, and leave them
alone, they would form a complete whole, formed differently according
to the different systems. The exhalants can also be considered as
everywhere connected, as we have seen. Suppose on the contrary that the
organs intermediate to the bones, the cartilages, the fibro-cartilages,
&c. should be removed, all the parts of these systems would
immediately be separated, and you would not have one continuous whole.

The order to be followed in the examination of these systems is of no
importance; we shall place them in the following order, which will
comprehend 1st, the osseous; 2d, medullary; 3d, cartilaginous; 4th,
fibrous; 5th, fibro-cartilaginous; 6th, animal muscular; 7th, organic
muscular; 8th, mucous; 9th, serous; 10th, glandular; 11th, cutaneous;
12th, epidermoid; 13th, and finally, the system of the hair.

Observe that nature is not confined to any methodical order, in
distributing these systems in the different apparatus; that she has
no regard to the great differences that she has established between
the functions. Each can at the same time belong to the apparatus of
functions that have no analogy. Thus the fibro-cartilaginous, which
is found especially in the organs of locomotion, and consequently in
animal life, enters also by the trachea into the respiratory apparatus;
thus the mucous system, everywhere destined to the organs of internal
life, belongs also to the external life in the conjunctiva, in the
nasal fossæ, &c. to generation in the vesiculæ seminales, in the
prostate, &c.; thus the glandular system pours by turns fluids upon the
organs of the two lives as upon those of generation; thus the serous
surfaces are spread upon parts whose functions have no resemblance
upon the brain and the stomach, for example, upon the articular
cartilages and the lungs, &c. Let us consider then the simple systems
abstractedly, if I may so say; let us describe them in an insulated
manner as materials distinct from each other, though united two by
two, three by three, four by four, &c. to form the partial edifices of
our apparatus, edifices from which results the general edifice of our
organs. Each of these apparatus is destined to exercise a determinate
function, and ought consequently to be classed as functions; it is in
this manner also that we shall distribute them in the Descriptive
Anatomy. But the simple systems, not tending to a common object, except
as they are united in the apparatus, we cannot, when considering them
separately, confine them to any classification borrowed from their
destination.




OSSEOUS SYSTEM.


This system, remarkable among all the others by the hardness and
resistance that characterize it, has from this double attribute a
fitness to serve as a common base for all, upon which they rest, and
around which they are suspended and fixed. The whole of the pieces that
form it, are connected together for this use, by means of flexible and
resisting bands, which with these pieces make a whole that is called
a skeleton. The osseous whole, placed in the midst of many organs
that it sustains, everywhere continuous in its different parts, has
not however, like the primitive systems, continuity of peculiar life
from one of its extremities to the other. The bands which connect
these different pieces, very different from them in their nature and
their properties, produce in them an insulation of vitality, which the
different parts of the above systems do not exhibit, because in their
continuity their nature is everywhere the same.


ARTICLE FIRST.


_Of the Forms of the Osseous System._

Considered in relation to their forms, the bones are of three sorts,
long, flat and short. One dimension predominates in the first, viz.
length; two are in nearly equal proportions in the second, length and
breadth; these two last dimensions, with thickness especially added,
characterize the short bones. Let us examine each in a general manner.


I. _Of the Long Bones._

The long bones belong in general to the apparatus of locomotion, in
which they form a kind of levers that the muscles move in different
directions. All are placed in the extremities, in which their whole
forms a kind of central column, moveable in different directions. We
see them successively diminishing in length and increasing in number,
when examined from the superior to the inferior part, from the thigh
or the humerus to the phalanges of the toes or the fingers. It follows
from this double opposite arrangement, that the top of the limbs is
characterized by the extent of its motions, and the bottom by the
multiplicity, variety and narrow limits of these motions.

These bones have all an analogous conformation; thick and large at
their extremities, they are more slender and usually rounded in the
middle or body, as anatomists call it.

The size of the osseous extremities exhibits the double advantage, 1st,
of presenting to the articulations large surfaces and consequently more
causes of resistance to different displacements; 2d, of contributing
to the regularity of the forms of the limb to which they belong.
Observe in fact that the muscles and the bones are placed in an inverse
direction in the extremities. The middle of the first, which is their
largest part, corresponds to the middle of the second, which forms
their small portion, whilst the extremities of these compensate by
their size for the smallness of the tendons which terminate the others,
and which are placed at the side of them. The increase of size of the
extremities of the long bones is not sudden; it commences imperceptibly
upon the body. We observe upon these different extremities eminences of
articulation and of insertion.

The middle or the body has no eminence; prominent lines are seen
there, always destined for aponeurotic insertions, and which, when
they are very considerable take from the bone its cylindrical form,
which it however preserves in the interior; thus the tibia is evidently
triangular externally, though within its canal has the form of that of
the femur. In general these lines of insertion, always separated by
plain surfaces, are three in number upon each long bone, as we see on
the humerus, the radius, the ulna, the tibia, fibula, &c. I know not
the reason of this law of conformation. Another general observation
is, that the body of almost all the long bones is twisted, so that the
direction of its superior part is not the same as that of the inferior;
by tracing from above downwards one of these lines of which I have just
spoken, this may be seen; it is however more evident in the adult than
in the fœtus. This change of direction has no uniformity in the course
it pursues.

The internal forms of the long bones are very well seen by sawing them
longitudinally. The texture of the cells fills them to the extremities;
it is, as we shall see, more fine and less abundant in the middle,
where the medullary canal exists.

This canal does not exist in the first month of the fœtus, nor as long
as the bone is cartilaginous; the osseous state is the period of its
formation. All the gelatine of the middle of the bone is then absorbed,
exhalation brings no more there, except in the very delicate texture of
the cells that this canal contains; this function, which is nothing in
the centre, becomes more active on the circumference of the bone. This
increase of activity of the external exhalants favours the formation
of the compact texture, the development of which takes place precisely
at the same time as that of the canal whose parietes it forms; so that
at this period of ossification, exhalation and absorption appear to be
in an inverse state in the two parts of the bone; one is very active on
the exterior in bringing phosphate of lime, with which it encrusts the
already existing parenchyma; the other is very active in the interior
in removing the gelatine whose absence forms the space from which the
medullary canal arises.

There is no well marked medullary cavity except in the humerus, the
radius, the ulna, the femur, the tibia, the fibula and clavicle. The
ribs and the phalanges, which in their forms resemble them, have much
of the ordinary texture of the cells in their centre, and hardly
ever any of that more delicate texture of the cells which occupies
the centre of the bones above named, and which is only found in the
medullary cavity.

This cavity does not extend beyond the body of the bone; where the
compact texture grows thinner, it disappears, and is replaced by a
great quantity of the texture of the cells, which fills the extremity
of the bone. Its form is cylindrical and its direction straight. It
does not vary in its form, on account of its asperities or the external
prominent lines of the body of the bone, which is only thicker in
these places. Its parietes are much smoother in the middle, than at
the extremities, where there are already many considerable cellular
filaments thrown off. There are in many subjects, delicate, horizontal
bony partitions, which interrupt almost entirely its continuity in this
place, and appear to divide it into two or three very distinct parts.

The medullary canal serves not only to lodge and defend the medullary
organ, but also to give more resistance to the bone; for we know, that
of two cylinders formed of an equal quantity of matter, one of which
is hollow, and consequently has a greater diameter than the other
which is full, the first will resist more than the second, because we
can bend and break it with less facility. Full cylinders, equal in
diameter to the long bones, would have prevented by their weight, the
motions of the limbs; whilst other cylinders of the same weight as the
present, but without any cavity, would give too small a surface for
the insertion of the muscles. To unite small weight with a sufficient
space in the middle of the long bones, is then a great advantage of the
medullary canal.

This canal disappears in the first periods of the formation of callus
in fractures, because the whole medullary organ is occupied at this
place by gelatine, and becomes cartilaginous; then this gelatine
gradually re-absorbed, without being replaced, favours the development
of a new cavity, and the communication is re-established between the
superior and inferior parts of the canal.

I have observed that, in the first age, and while the extremities
of the bones are cartilaginous, the medullary canal is shorter in
proportion than in the adult; it hardly forms at birth more than the
middle third of the bone, the superior and inferior thirds being formed
at first by the cartilaginous portion of each extremity, then a texture
of cells intermediate between this portion and the canal; so that as we
advance in age, its length becomes in proportion greater.


II. _Of the Flat Bones._

The flat bones have in general, but little relation to locomotion,
which they only assist by the insertion of the muscles that go to the
long bones. Nature designs them especially to form the cavities, such
as those of the cranium and the pelvis. Their conformation renders them
very proper for this use. Their number varies according to the cavities
with which they are connected; many always unite to form one, and it
is this circumstance that contributes in part to their solidity. In
fact, external blows losing their force at the place of their junction,
fracture them with less ease. If the cranium was only one single
piece, its solutions of continuity would be much more frequent than
they now are. So that as the sutures ossify in old age, they become
more brittle. In children, in whom the ossification is not complete,
and the number of whose separate, osseous pieces is consequently more
considerable in the head, the pelvis, &c. the difficulty of fractures
is very great, because the soft bands which unite the solid parts yield
to external bodies, without breaking.

The flat bones are almost all curved, concave and convex on the
opposite sides; this arises from their destination in the formation of
cavities. Their curve varies according to the place in the cavity they
occupy; this curve is the cause of a very powerful resistance, when
that mentioned above does not exist. Thus in the first age, the cranium
resists by yielding; but as the sutures become more closed, and only
one osseous piece is formed, it is by the mechanism of the arch that
the brain is protected.

All the flat bones have two surfaces and a circumference. According
as the first serve for muscular insertions, or are only covered by
aponeuroses, membranes, &c. they are rough or smooth. Towards the
middle the bone is thinner; it has more thickness at the circumference,
which is either for articulation or insertion. In the first case, this
excess of thickness gives more solidity to the joints, which are then
made with larger surfaces, as we see in the cranium; in the second, it
presents to the fibres more points of origin, as we see on the crista
of the ilium and the greater part of its circumference.

The internal forms of the flat bones have but few peculiarities; their
two external layers leave between them a space which is filled by the
texture of the cells.


III. _Of the Short Bones._

The short bones are placed in general in parts where are found united
mobility and solidity, as in the vertebral column, the tarsus, and the
metatarsus. Always small, they are in great number in the regions which
they occupy; their number compensates for their size in the formation
of the parts of the skeleton to which they contribute. It is this
number also, that gives to these parts the union of the two almost
opposite attributes of which we have spoken, viz. solidity, because
the external efforts are lost in the numerous bands which unite them,
and mobility, because the whole of their individual motions gives a
considerable general motion.

There is nothing constant or uniform in the external conformation
of these bones; it is modified according to the general plan of the
whole, of which they are the parts; thus the different uses of the
carpus, metacarpus and vertebral column determine the different forms
of their respective bones. These bones have always many cavities and
eminences upon their external surfaces, necessary for their numerous
articulations, for the insertion of the many ligamentary cords that
unite them, and the muscles that move them.

In the interior, these bones have nothing peculiar, except an abundance
of the texture of the cells which forms them almost wholly, and exposes
them to frequent caries.

Nature is not however regular in the division of bones into long,
flat and short. Here as elsewhere, she disregards our methodical
descriptions, and shows us the bones sometimes exhibiting the character
of long ones and short, and sometimes uniting the attributes of both
these last with the flat ones. The basilary apophysis and the superior
part of the occiput, the body and the lateral portions of the sphenoid,
when placed in contrast, prove this assertion. A bone sometimes by
its external form belongs to the long ones, but from its internal
organization should be classed with the flat, of this the ribs are an
example, &c.


IV. _Of the Bony Eminences._

The bony eminences have generally the name of apophyses; they are
called epiphyses when the cartilage of ossification which unites them
to the bone is not yet encrusted with calcareous substance.

These eminences have four great divisions; viz. those, 1st, of
articulation; 2d, of insertion; 3d, of reflection; 4th, of impression.

1st. The eminences of articulation vary according as the articulation
is moveable or immoveable; I shall not consider them here, as I should
be obliged to repeat it in the chapter upon articulations.

2d. The eminences of insertion are very numerous in the bones; they
only give attachment to the fibrous organs, as the ligaments, the
tendons, the aponeuroses, the dura-mater; no organ differing from these
is implanted into the bony eminences, or generally into the bones,
except by means of them; the muscles are a remarkable example of this.

These eminences are usually much less in women than in men, in children
than in adults, in weak animals than in carnivorous ones who live by
attacking and destroying their prey. The prominence of the eminences of
insertion is always an index of the force and vigour of the motions.
They are the more developed in proportion as the muscles are. Examine
comparatively the skeleton of a strong, sanguineous man, whose muscles
are powerfully delineated through the integuments, and that of a
feeble, phlegmatic man, whose rounded forms like those of women, do not
appear prominent, and you will see the difference.

The form of these eminences of insertion varies greatly; sometimes the
muscles are inserted by many separate aponeurotic fibres; then they
are small, very numerous and form only little asperities imprinted on
a greater or less surface; sometimes it is by a single tendon that the
muscle takes its origin, then the apophysis is usually very prominent,
and occupies a small space. Sometimes a broad aponeurosis gives rise to
the fleshy fibres; it is then a bony line, more or less projecting that
gives insertion.

The eminences are in general in proportion to the muscles that are
attached to them; for example, in three muscles of nearly equal size,
one of which is attached by separate fibres, the other by a tendon, and
the other by an aponeurosis, we observe that the sum of the asperities
of insertion of the first, the separate apophysis of the second, and
the prominent line of the third are nearly equal in the quantity of
osseous substance that forms them; so that by supposing that the
apophysis was divided into asperities, or extended into a line, or that
the asperities were united together, or the line concentrated so as to
form an apophysis, this quantity of osseous substance would be found to
be about the same.

We understand all the advantage of the eminences for the insertion of
muscles, which they render distant from the centre of the bone, lessen
the parallelism with its axis and consequently favour their motions in
an evident manner.

Are these produced by the pulling of the muscles? This opinion borrowed
from the laws of the formation of soft and inorganic bodies, does not
accord with the known phenomena of vitality, with the existence of
eminences where there is no muscular insertion, and which are often
more prominent than these, with the disproportion that exists between
the elongation of certain apophyses by muscular insertion, that of the
styloid, for example, and the force of the muscles that are attached to
it, &c.

The eminences for ligamentary insertion have the advantage, by removing
a little the ligament from the articulation, of facilitating its
motions; this is especially remarkable in the lateral ligaments of the
elbow, the knee, &c.

As to the other eminences of insertion, we can hardly consider in a
general manner their respective functions.

3d. The eminences of reflection are those under which a tendon
passes, in deviating from its primitive course; such is the hook of
the pterygoid apophysis, the malleolar extremity of the fibula, &c.
Almost all these eminences have a slope or excavation in one direction,
connected in the opposite with a ligament, so as to form a ring for the
passage of the tendon.

4th. The eminences of impression are those which arise, when the
different organs form on the osseous surfaces excavations that
separate these eminences, which in fact only appear because the bone
at this place remains at its ordinary level. The cerebral and muscular
impressions are given as examples of this arrangement. But are these
impressions really the effect of the compression of the organs on the
bone, or do they arise from the laws of the osseous development, laws
which give to the bones forms accommodated to the surrounding organs? I
adopt more readily the second than the first of these opinions, which
has been thought very probable from the effect of aneurisms upon bones
that are contiguous to them, which are worn and gradually destroyed
by them. But let us remark that if the muscles, the brain, and the
vessels by their pressure, had upon the bones in a natural state, an
action analogous to that of aneurism, the state of the parts ought to
be the same as in that case. The compact layer ought to be destroyed
where these depressions are, and leave in its place an unequal, ragged
surface, but the contrary happens, which makes me think, that what is
commonly called the impression of organs, is only a natural effect of
ossification.


V. _Of the Osseous Cavities._

The osseous cavities are very numerous; those only which are found
on the exterior of the bones will be treated of. They are divided,
like the eminences, into articular and non-articular. The first
will be examined, with the analogous eminences, in the chapter on
articulations. Among the second there are cavities, 1st, of insertion;
2d, of reception; 3d, of slipping; 4th, of impression; 5th, of
transmission; 6th, of nutrition.

1st. The cavities of insertion give attachment to the aponeuroses of
the muscles, to the ligaments, &c. They have the advantage, 1st, of
multiplying the insertions of the fibres, without increasing the size
of the bone, since a concave surface is evidently more extensive than a
plain surface would be which should occupy the space between its edges;
2d, of allowing the muscular fibres more room, and consequently giving
them greater length than if they arose from an eminence, which also
gives more extent to the motions. The pterygoid, digastric cavities,
&c. present examples of this arrangement.

2d. The cavities of reception are those which serve to receive an
organ, lodge and defend it; such are the fossæ of the bones of the
cranium, those of the ossa ilii, &c. These cavities sometimes belong to
the whole of the bone, the form of which is concave, as we see in the
frontal bone, sometimes they are hollowed out upon an insulated part,
like the maxillary depression of the inferior jaw; they are always
destined for an essential part, for a gland, a viscus, &c.

3d. The cavities of slipping are in general found at the extremity
of the long bones. They are grooves, more or less deep, in which the
tendons glide to go to the place in which they are inserted. All are
covered with a cartilage and terminated by a very strong ligamentary
ring. Do the tendons by their friction form these cavities? This is
the common opinion, but it does not appear to me more probable than
the theory of muscular, vascular impressions, &c. These cavities
ought to be then so much the deeper, in proportion as the muscles
are the more exerted; they ought not to exist in subjects paralytic
from their infancy; they ought not to exist in the cartilages of
ossification in the fœtus, whose limbs have hardly ever moved; but the
contrary of all this is constantly observed. Let us describe then all
the different configurations of the bones, as a consequence of the
laws of ossification, laws in obedience to which the osseous forms,
all primitively determined, are made to develop. The size of the
extremities of the long bones favours the existence of these different
cavities, which cannot on this account injure the osseous solidity.

4th. The cavities of impression correspond with the eminences of the
same name. I have spoken of them above.

5th. The cavities of transmission are especially destined for the
vessels and the nerves. We find many of them on the head; they have
sometimes the form of a groove, sometimes that of a tube and at others
that of a slit, according to the thickness or breadth of the bones
which these vessels or nerves traverse in order to go from one place to
another. The periosteum lines them; they contain more or less cellular
texture. The nerves and vessels they transmit are foreign to the bones.

6th. The cavities of nutrition, on the contrary, give passage to
vessels which carry to the bones or the medullary organ the substances
that repair them. They are of three sorts.

The first form canals that are seen on the long bones exclusively,
and go to the medullary cavity. Each bone has but one of these,
situated always on its body, directed obliquely between the fibres of
the compact texture, running sometimes from below upwards, sometimes
from above down into the cavity of the bone, and thus forming a
communication from without to within for the vessel of the medullary
organ. This foramen serves particularly for the exhalation and
nutrition of this organ, and nourishes the bone only secondarily.

The second kind of cavities of nutrition belong especially to the
texture of the cells of the bones. Thus they are seen wherever
this texture abounds, in the extremities of the long bones, the
circumference of the flat ones, and the whole superficies of the short
ones. Their diameter is greater than that of the canal which goes to
the medullary cavity; it is less than that of the canals of the compact
texture. Their number is very considerable; I have counted a hundred
and forty upon the tibial extremity of the femur, twenty upon the body
of one of the dorsal vertebræ, fifty upon the os calcis, &c. In general
this number is always in proportion to the quantity of the texture of
the cells that the bone contains. Hence why there are but few on the
flat bones of the cranium, why they are more numerous on the flat bones
of the pelvis especially where this texture is abundant, as on the
ischium, on the iliac portion of the circumference of the ilium, &c.
By pouring mercury into the spongy texture, it runs out from all these
foramina, and thus proves their communications. They are irregularly
scattered wherever they are. They are not met with on the body of the
long bones, because the body contains little or none of the texture of
the cells.

The third kind of canals of nutrition is only destined to the compact
texture. It consists of an infinite number of little pores which the
eye can clearly distinguish, and through which small vessels pass, that
go to this texture. An evident proof that they do not go to the texture
of the cells, is, that in the preceding experiment, the mercury never
finds in them a way to escape externally. It is impossible to determine
their number; it is prodigious in childhood. As the bones in old age
become filled with calcareous substance, they are obliterated, and
the vessels they contain become small ligaments, foreign to osseous
nutrition, which continually grows weaker, and is soon annihilated,
and allows necrosis to seize upon the bones, if general death does not
prevent this partial death of the osseous system.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.

The peculiar texture of the osseous system forms in it the principal
and predominant part, especially as we advance in age. The common
organs are in much less proportion.


I. _Texture Peculiar to the Osseous System._

The texture of the bones, like that of most of the other organs,
presents itself under the aspect of fibres whose nature is everywhere
the same, but which differently arranged, form two principal
modifications; in the one, these fibres being more or less scattered,
exhibit many cells; in the other being close to each other, they form a
compact substance in which it is difficult to distinguish them. Hence
two sub-divisions of the osseous texture, that with cells, and the
compact. Authors admit a third one, the reticular; but this is included
in the first.


_Texture with Cells._

The texture with cells does not exist in the first periods of
ossification. The time of its formation is when the phosphate of lime
is added to the gelatine of the primitive cartilage, and gives to the
organ the bony nature. Then an infinite number of cells is formed in
the solid mass of cartilage, because the gelatine, taken up by the
absorbents, disappears in the place they occupy. No more is brought
by the exhalants, which begin to carry the phosphate of lime to the
fibrous cross-pieces, whose interlacing forms these cells; so that
the development of the texture of the cells belongs evidently to the
disproportion that takes place in the bones at a certain period of
their growth, between the functions of the exhalant and absorbent
system, until then in equilibrium. We know not the cause of this
disproportion, it appears to be a law of ossification. It is by virtue
of this law and by an analogous mechanism, that the os ethmoides, at
first solid and full when it is cartilage, is hollowed out at the
period of its ossification, into a great number of cells. It is thus
that the sphenoidal, frontal sinuses, &c. are formed and enlarged.

The formation of the texture of the cells ceases when all the epiphyses
have disappeared. At this period it exhibits to us an infinite number
of fibres which appear to arise from the internal surface of the
compact texture, go in different directions, cross, unite, separate,
bifurcate, in a word, pursue such irregular courses, that it is
impossible to follow them. Their size is not less variable; sometimes
their delicacy is such, that they can hardly be touched without
breaking; at others they are quite large. Often instead of fibres there
are layers, of more or less considerable size, from which arise other
smaller ones, which appear to ramify, and from which result, when
they are near each other, species of canals, which are seen very well
by sawing transversely the extremity of a long bone, so as to have a
segment of half an inch.

The cells which are made by their separation, are of very unequal form
and capacity.

All communicate together; the following experiments prove this. 1st.
If we make a hole in the extremity of a long bone, or upon the surface
of a short or flat one, and pour in mercury, it passes through all the
communications, and comes out of the natural foramina on the surface
of the bone, which also open into the cells. 2d. Saw a long bone at one
of its extremities, cover its whole surface with something that shuts
up its pores, then expose it to the sun; the medullary fluid not being
able to escape by the external pores, will come out at the sawed place,
after passing successively through all the cells. 3d. By varnishing a
dry bone, and opening it only in two opposite points, we can force air,
water and every kind of fluid through these communications, from one
opening to the other.

We can then consider the interior of every bone as forming a general
cavity that is filled by many interlaced fibres. I have not observed a
sensible difference in the direction of these fibres in the three kinds
of bones.


_Compact Texture._

The fibres that form the compact texture are not the same as those
of the preceding. These fibres, being in juxta-position, not leaving
any space between them, giving by their approximation a remarkable
density to the texture they form, have a longitudinal direction in the
long bones, are in the form of rays in the flat ones, and cross each
other in all directions in the short ones. This triple arrangement of
the fibres of the compact texture appears to be wholly owing to the
manner of ossification. In fact, when we examine its progress in the
primitive cartilages, we see these organs encrusted with the phosphate
of lime, in the same direction which these fibres afterwards take.
Thus these fibres are very evident in the first age, on the bones of
the cranium in particular. When the phosphate of lime, successively
deposited on the cartilaginous parenchyma, predominates there, then
the whole is confounded in the compact texture in one homogeneous
mass. But still there are different circumstances that indicate the
primitive direction of the fibres: 1st. When by an acid we remove from
bones their calcareous part, then the cartilaginous portion keeps as a
kind of mould, the form of the substances that filled it, and exhibits
fibres whose direction is the same as that pointed out for the three
species of bones. If we wish to separate the cartilaginous layers, it
is in this direction that it is most easily done. 2d. The fissures that
come in bones long exposed to the air follow in general the natural
direction of the fibres. 3d. Calcined bones exhibit nearly the same
phenomenon.

The direction of the fibres of the compact texture is changed entirely
in the apophyses, in which it does not follow that of the principal
bone. In those, which by their form, partake of the character of the
long bones, as in the styloid, these fibres are longitudinal; they
go in all directions in those, which like the mastoid, the different
species of condyles, &c. resemble in their shape the short bones.

The assemblage of the fibres forms, according to anatomists, layers
which they have considered as in juxta-position, and held together
by little pins according to some, and by the interlacing of fibres
according to others. These osseous layers do not appear to me to exist
in nature. All the fibres of the compact texture adhere to each other,
cross and form a whole that we cannot conceive of in this manner, and
which besides does not accord with the irregularity of the distribution
of the vessels. Art separates here fibres layer by layer, as it is
done in a muscle, in a ligament, &c.; but these layers are wholly
factitious; to exhibit the bones as formed by an union of these layers
is to give a very inaccurate idea of their structure. It is still
more inaccurate to consider these layers as attached to each other by
osseous pins, by attraction, or by a glutinous matter which serves as
a glue. All these ideas, contrary to anatomical examination, suggested
by a false application of the laws of the adhesion of inorganic bodies
to the adhesion of organized fibres, now belong only to the history
of physiological errors. There is a circumstance, it is said, that
very evidently proves the lamellated structure of the bones, it is
their exfoliation. It is true that often very distinct layers are
separated from the living bone, but these layers are only the product
of exfoliation itself. Then in fact the bone dies on the surface;
the superficial vessels receive no more blood; this fluid is stopped
under the portion deprived of life, the exhalation of the phosphate of
lime ceases there, every kind of sanguineous, exhalant and absorbent
vessel is destroyed; a slow inflammation, with suppuration, comes on,
and fixes the line of demarcation; and as this line is often at the
same place, all which is above it becomes an inorganic layer which
gradually falls off, and preserves its osseous solidity, because the
dead absorbents were not able to remove the phosphate of lime. Besides,
nothing is more common than to see exfoliation take place not by
layers, and the bone afterwards exhibit an unequal surface, the effect
of the inequality of the thickness of the exfoliated portions. Finally,
exfoliation often takes place in a direction opposite to that which the
layers are thought to have; this is what we see in the separation of
the extremity of the long bones, that have been exposed to the air or
too much irritated after amputation, in the shedding of the horns of
animals, &c. Let us consider the compact texture as an assemblage of
condensed fibres, not separated by layers, which we can only consider
as imaginary.

The fibres of the compact texture differ in their organic arrangement,
from the muscular fibres in this, that frequent elongations unite them
to each other, whereas the muscular have only the cellular organ, the
vessels and the nerves as the means of union. Such is the intimate
juxta-position of the fibres of the compact texture, that they leave
between them only pores hardly sensible to the naked eye, but which
become so however with a glass, and which the medullary juice and
vessels fill. In the rickets this density of texture disappears, and
we observe in the middle part of the long bones and under the layer of
periosteum more thick than common, an osseous texture, easily bent in
all directions, forming an infinity of cells and taking the place of
the compact texture that ought to be there. It appears that this change
of compact texture into that of cells is made less by the absorption of
a part of the phosphate of lime, than by the extension of the osseous
fibres which separate from each other, and leave between them spaces
that did not before exist; this gives to the bodies of long rickety
bones a very considerable thickness. I have many times made this remark.


_Arrangement of the two Osseous Textures in the three kinds of Bones._

The osseous textures, considered in the different kinds of bones, are
differently arranged. In general the compact forms the exterior, the
covering of the bone, and that of the cells occupies the interior. The
ossa spongiosa form an exception to this rule, the modifications of
which we shall now examine.

1st. In the long bones, the compact texture has a very remarkable
thickness in the centre, where it serves the triple purpose, first
of protecting the medullary organ, of which it is the covering,
then of giving solidity to the bone in this place, which more than
the extremities, is exposed to great efforts in locomotion, falls,
concussion, &c. and where the bone, traversed only by some very weak
fibres of the cells, cannot borrow its resistance but from its external
parietes; finally, of thus diminishing without danger the size of the
bone in the middle part of the limb, the form of which, becomes by
this means much more regular. So that as we go from the centre, we see
in a long bone, sawed longitudinally, the compact texture diminish
in thickness, and form at last at the extremities only a delicate
layer analogous to that which covers the short bones. Thus the power
of resistance of the long bones, at their extremity, is less in their
compact shell, than in the great quantity of the texture of the cells
deposited under it; it is this especially that prevents fractures;
hence we see how the proportion of the compact texture and that of the
cells being inverse in the two parts of the bone, the manner of their
resistance is also inverse.

The texture of the cells differs a little when examined in the
medullary canal and in the extremities. In the canal there are
extremely delicate filaments, continued from larger fibres which fill
above and below the extremities of the bone, and the compact portion
which forms the osseous cylinder. Few and scattered at random in the
middle of the canal, these filaments approximate each other, and form
a kind of net-work, as they go from it; hence the name of reticular
substance by which it is designated. But it is not a distinct texture,
it is only a modification of that of the cells; a modification, which
is especially characterized, 1st, by the delicacy of the fibres; 2d,
by the uniform absence of those fine and short layers which frequently
belong to this texture in other parts. Besides, the manifest use of
this portion of the texture of the cells, too weak to contribute to
the resistance of the bone, is evidently to serve as a support to the
medullary system, and insertion for its membrane. At the extremities
of the long bones, the fibres of the texture of the cells increase
a little, approximate each other, are scattered in layers, and give
to the bone by their union and number, a remarkable thickness and
resistance, without however increasing the weight, which very much
favours locomotion, considering that this weight placed at the
extremity of the lever would have been very painful to raise.

2d. In the flat bones, the compact texture forms two external layers,
the thickness of which is between that of the middle of the long bones,
and that of the extremity of the same bones, or that of the short ones.
Between these two layers is found the texture of the cells, similar
in general to that of the extremity of the long bones, a little more
lamellated however, thicker usually at the circumference, often almost
wanting in the middle of the bone, where its two compact layers in
juxta-position allow a light to be seen through it, when placed behind.
In general wherever the broad bones are so thin, from the want of the
texture of the cells, there are very strong muscles, which by their
thick layers give solidity to the bone. We see examples of this in the
iliac, sub-scapular, inferior-occipital fossæ, &c.

3d. In the short bones, the texture of the cells always predominates;
the bone is almost wholly formed of it, a delicate layer of compact
texture forms only its covering, and in this respect, the organization
of these bones is the same as that of the long bones at their
extremities; thus the resistance of the bone depends on the whole of
its mass, and no part makes a greater resistance than another against
fractures. We see, from all that has thus far been said, the successive
manner of the solidity of the different bones. In the middle of the
long bones, there is hardly any thing but compact texture to which it
is owing; in the flat bones it is as much to this texture as to that of
the cells; in the extremities of the long bones and in the short ones
it is almost to this last only that its solidity is owing.

4th. In the osseous eminences, the compact texture is more abundant
than elsewhere, especially in those of insertion, as in the prominent
lines of the long bones, which are all formed of it, in the asperities
of the osseous surfaces, in their angles. If the eminence is
considerable, there enters into it also more or less of the texture
of the cells as we see in the spinous and transverse processes of the
vertebræ, in the coracoid, mastoid, &c. processes. The eminences of the
moveable articulations have in general less of the compact texture,
solidity is given to the bone by the articular cartilage. Those of the
immoveable articulations, on the contrary, in general smaller, as the
sutures of the bones of the cranium, for example, are in proportion
more compact than cellular.

5th. In the osseous cavities, all those which serve for moveable
articulations, are only furnished with a very delicate compact layer;
it is thicker when the articulations are immoveable. In general all
the foramina, cavities and canals that transmit from one region to
another vessels, nerves or other organs are everywhere lined with a
compact layer that defends them from the impression of these parts.
The foramina at the base of the cranium, the dental canals, the vidian
foramina, &c. are examples of this arrangement.


_Of the Composition of the Osseous Texture._

Whatever may be the modifications under which it is exhibited, the
osseous texture has everywhere the same nature; the same elements form
it; now these substances are especially a saline calcareous substance
and a gelatinous one.

The existence of the saline substance in the bones is proved in
different ways. 1st. Combustion, by destroying the gelatinous portion,
leaves a friable, brittle body, of a form analogous to that of the bone
and which is nothing but this saline substance, which resembles, if
we may so say, a moulded body that keeps the form of the mould after
it has been taken away. If the combustion is pushed very far, and a
red heat produced on the calcined bones, they undergo a semi-fusion,
which makes them resemble the state of porcelain; they have then a
very compact, fine, semi-vitreous grain, a semi-transparency, and an
appearance like that of the vitrified earths. 2d. The long continued
exposure of the bones to the air produces an effect very similar to
that of the first degree of combustion, though however the gelatine
is rarely so thoroughly removed, and the saline portion so perfectly
exposed as by the action of fire. Besides, it requires a very long time
to produce this effect, especially upon the thick bones; the thin ones
are more easily altered; I have often made this observation. After ten
years exposure to the air and rain, I have observed that clavicles
taken from the cemetery of Clamart, exhibited upon the action of the
acids, a cartilaginous parenchyma almost equal to that of a bone that
had been some time dried. But this parenchyma finally disappears, and
the bone falls to powder, when it is no longer supported by it, and the
particles of the remaining calcareous substance have been disunited
by time. 3d. In the last stages of all cancerous diseases, the bones
have a friability which is only owing to the greater proportion of this
last substance, a proportion arising itself from the small quantity
of gelatine that is then exhaled in the bones. 4th. When a bone has
been for some time exposed to the action of an acid, the nitric for
example, a portion of its substance is taken from it by this acid,
which is evidently a calcareous salt, as can be seen by mixing it
with a solution of an alkali, which uniting immediately to the acid,
exposes this salt, by making it precipitate. 5th. Papins digester, by
dissolving by the action of water reduced to vapour the gelatinous
portion, shows also this saline calcareous part.

Scheele has found that this portion is a neutral salt with an earthy
base, the phosphate of lime. Frequently the phosphorus in fresh bones
give them a luminous appearance, that can be seen very far in the
night. It is sometimes the whole of the bone, sometimes some parts only
that become luminous. I have always observed in the illuminated places
an oily exudation, either that comes from the medullary juice, or is
furnished by the fat of the neighbouring soft parts of the bone.

Different facts as evident as the preceding, prove in a manner not less
certain, the existence of a gelatinous substance in the bones. 1st.
When in the solution of the bones in the acids, the phosphate of lime
has left them, there remains a cartilaginous, flexible, elastic body,
yellowish when nitric acid is employed, of the same form as the bone.
Now we know that the gelatine especially nourishes the cartilages. 2d.
If besides we subject this cartilaginous residue to ebullition, we
extract a very great quantity of gelatine which is dissolved in the
water and can be afterwards precipitated by tannin. This substance
can even be removed from the bones without the previous extraction of
the phosphate of lime; it is thus that with bones stripped of every
surrounding organ, and reduced to very small fragments or even to
powder by the action of a rasp, very nourishing broths and jellies
are made. It is not without reason that in the preparation of boiled
meat, the bone is left attached to the meat; besides the white organs
that surround it, and the medullary oil that it contains, it furnishes
to the broth a substance that is peculiar to it. 3d. The combustion
of the bones, and especially of their cartilaginous residue, gives
an odour exactly similar to that of the combustion of the different
animal glues, which, as we know, the gelatine especially forms. 4th.
In the different affections in which the bones become soft, the earthy
substance is diminished more or less sensibly, and the gelatinous
remains more abundant in proportion than common.

These two substances, the gelatinous and saline, which enter
essentially into the composition of the bones, imprint upon them
very different characters. The phosphate of lime, almost foreign to
vitality, is only destined to give to the bones the solidity and
resistance that characterize them. The gelatinous substance, on the
contrary, has especially the animal character; thus the vital activity
is in the inverse ratio of one and the direct ratio of the other, as
we shall see. Deprived of gelatine, the bones are not capable of being
digested, they offer nothing for the gastric juices to act upon, they
cannot extract nutritive matter from them, because they act upon them
nearly as water does, which dissolves the gelatinous substance and
extracts it from the saline portion. Different animals that swallow
fresh bones for nourishment, would die from eating a calcined one; thus
the more the bones contain of this substance, the more nourishing they
are; those of young animals are on this account more proper to make
gelatinous broths, more suitable to be digested raw by the stomachs
of certain species, &c. If we expose a bone to the action of an acid,
so as to have only its cartilaginous parenchyma left, and afterwards
soften this parenchyma in boiling water, it becomes an aliment that can
be eaten.

Besides phosphate of lime and gelatine, the bones contain also some
saline principles, as the sulphate and carbonate of soda, &c. But this
proportion is too small to be noticed. Upon this point, I refer to
chemical books, especially to the great work of Fourcroy.


II. _Common Parts which enter into the organization of the Osseous
System._

The ancients ranked the bones among the white parts, among the tendons,
the cartilages, &c. It is sufficient however to examine the interior of
them to see, by the redness that distinguishes them, that much blood
enters them. This blood penetrates in three orders of vessels; one
belonging to the medullary cavity of the long bones, another to the
texture of the cells, and the other to the compact texture. These two
last orders distributed in the osseous texture, appear to be especially
destined to deposit the phosphate of lime; for in the cartilages of
ossification, the white vessels alone carry the gelatine; in other
cartilages it is the same; so that I think that this kind of vessels is
also destined in the bones which are perfectly formed to nourish their
cartilaginous parenchyma, whilst the red vessels belong more to their
calcareous portion.

Each medullary cavity has only one vessel, and only one foramen of
nutrition. This vessel has a diameter proportioned to that of the bone
which it penetrates, and in which it is divided immediately into two
branches, without permitting any ramification on the compact texture.
These go in an opposite direction to the two extremities of the bone,
ramify ad infinitum in the medullary organ, and their last branches
are lost in the commencement of the texture of the cells, where they
anastomose with the vessels of this texture; that which occupies the
medullary cavity under the name of reticular, and the internal surface
of the compact texture, receive also some branches. A vein everywhere
accompanies the artery, and follows the different distributions of it.

The vessels of the second order belong to the texture of the cells
of the long, flat and short bones; they are equal in number to the
foramina of this texture, and ramify on its cells; they communicate
with those of the marrow and of the compact texture. At death, the
small arteries in general remain full of red blood, which indicates
their course which their minuteness would conceal, and which injections
can rarely demonstrate with accuracy. The accompanying veins of these
arteries can hardly be seen.

The blood-vessels of the third order are only the last ramifications
of the arteries surrounding the bones, ramifications which enter in
great number the compact texture, and stop there. The existence of
these vessels may be proved in different ways. 1st. By detaching the
dura mater from the internal surface of the cranium, many small
sanguineous drops prove their rupture. 2d. By raising on a subject
of a middle age the periosteum, we make the same observation. I have
remarked that these experiments succeed especially on those that have
been drowned, or on animals destroyed by asphyxia, on account of the
great quantity of blood their vessels contain. 3d. If we fracture a
long bone in the middle, the compact portion, which forms the medullary
canal, exhibits small reddish striæ, which are nothing but these small
vessels still full of blood, and of which we thus discover a greater or
less number, according to the manner in which the blood was arrested in
the capillary system at the instant of death. 4th. The saw-dust of the
compact texture in living animals is red, though less evidently so than
that of the texture of the cells; a proof that these vessels have been
divided.

The vessels of the bones are very numerous in childhood; they diminish
in the adult, and become scarce in old age. The facility of the
formation of callus follows the same proportion in the different ages
of life. Often in affections of the osseous parenchyma they have a
remarkable development, which much exceeds their natural diameter.
Osteo-sarcoma, spina-ventosa, &c. exhibit this, which is much oftener
observed in cancerous tumours than any other.

These vessels communicate with each other by numerous anastomoses;
this is what we see especially in the long bones, between those of
the medullary organ and those of the texture of the cells. By these
communications, they mutually assist each other's functions. I have
seen the nourishing foramen of the tibia completely obliterated in a
body that I injected. A sort of cartilage filled this foramen; the
artery formed a real ligament. Yet its bifurcation in the medullary
canal was found very well injected, and besides no alteration appeared
in the nutrition of the medullary organ, which had probably received
as much blood as usual. I found nothing in the neighbourhood of
the foramen, which showed the cause of this obliteration, which an
exostosis, an affection of the periosteum, or an inflammation can very
easily produce.

On the other hand we know that very considerable osseous layers are
often taken from the extremity of the long bones by caries, which
consequently destroys all the vessels corresponding to these layers,
and yet the bone beneath lives, principally by the blood that it
receives by the extremities of the artery of the medullary organ. This
is nearly what happens to the long bones in the first age, in which the
cartilaginous extremities have not vessels of the second order, and in
which consequently almost all the blood comes from this same artery
of the medullary organ; thus it is much larger in proportion, and the
foramen which receives it much more considerable.

Nothing is yet known upon the systems of absorbent and exhalant vessels
of the bones, and we can reason upon this point only from analogy.
Besides the nutritive process evidently supposes them there.

As to their cellular texture, it appears to be almost nothing; we can
even say that in whatever place we break the compact fibres or those
of the cells, its filaments are not distinct; but it is their dense
and compact texture that conceals them from us. In fact, 1st, when
this texture is softened, and the bone has become flesh, as it is
called, the cellular texture is very apparent there. 2d. The fleshy
granulations, rising on places that have been fractured or laid bare,
are only the extension of the cellular texture which has too much
calcareous substance to allow it to be seen in the natural state.
3d. After having removed from a fresh bone all this substance by an
acid, I have sometimes observed cellular filaments by separating the
cartilaginous fibres which form the parenchyma that is left. 4th. When
we boil this cartilaginous parenchyma in order to extract the gelatine
from it, there remains portions of membranes which are evidently
cellular.

We cannot trace the nerves in the bones, the filaments that enter them
are so fine; I do not know that anatomy has any positive data upon this
point.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.


I. _Physical Properties._

The bones have very strongly marked physical properties. Solidity and
hardness are their peculiar portion; they derive these properties
from the phosphate of lime which penetrates them, thus they are
constantly increasing with age, because this substance becomes more
and more predominant. Elasticity is another physical property of the
bones, which is found combined with the two preceding, but which is
in an inverse order; as it is in the gelatinous substance, in the
cartilaginous portion of the bone that it resides, it is, like this
portion, greater in childhood. In old age, the bones lose entirely
their suppleness and elasticity; they break more easily. Elasticity
is more evident in the long and small bones, than in those which are
larger; the fibula bends and evidently goes back again, this the tibia
could not do without difficulty. It is not that the one is more elastic
than the other, but it is that its conformation is more favourable to
the development of this property.


II. _Properties of Texture._

Although the hardness and solidity of the osseous texture seem to be
opposed to every kind of extension and contraction, yet these two
phenomena and the properties of texture from which they arise, are
often very evident in it.

The extensibility of the osseous fibres is proved by the observation
of many diseases, for example, the spina-ventosa, the swelling of the
maxillary sinus when it contains a polypus, by the enlargement of
the bones of the cranium in hydrocephalus, &c. I would remark on the
subject of these different distensions, that often by the influence
of analogous causes, the bones which yield and are distended in the
above cases, are broken, worn and destroyed in others. A polypus of
the nose breaks through the naso-palatine partition, without having
first distended it; aneurism of the aorta does not bend the sternum
or the vertebræ, but it breaks through and destroys these bones.
Whence arises this difference from causes nearly the same? This is not
easily determined. The contractility of texture is very evident in the
bones, when the cause which distended the fibres is removed. We see
the alveoli contract, and become effaced, when a tooth has been drawn
from them. The diminution of the thickness of the jaw after cutting
the teeth arises only from the contraction of its fibres, which are
no longer distended as much, because the root is not so broad as the
crown, which had till then been wholly in the bone. The maxillary sinus
contracts when a fungus is removed from it, or pus is discharged from
the carious bone, &c. If death was not too soon the consequence of the
puncture of the head of hydrocephalic patients, I am persuaded that we
should see the bones gradually contract, and restore the cavity of the
cranium to its natural dimensions. When we remove the dead piece from
a long bone in necrosis, the new bone, formed on the exterior by means
of the periosteum contracts in an evident manner. In paralysis of the
optic nerve, its foramen becomes narrower. The orbit contracts when a
cancerous eye has been extirpated. I have dissected the carotid canal
in a dog whose carotid I had tied; there was no contraction because the
blood coming by anastomoses dilated the artery to the usual size.

This contraction of the bones, by means of the contractility of
texture, is not so sudden as that of the muscles, the skin, &c. when
they are no longer distended by a tumour, an aqueous collection, &c.
This arises from the difference of the organic texture, from the
rigidity of osseous fibres owing to the calcareous substance they
contain, &c. Thus the organic sensibility is less evident in them.


III. _Vital Properties._

The bones have hardly any animal properties in a natural state. Their
sensibility is nothing; the saw, the mallet, and the chisel act upon
their texture almost with impunity; an obscure feeling is the only
result of the action of these instruments; fire even can act upon them
without making the animal suffer much. But in a morbid state, the
sensibility is developed to the greatest extent; we know the horrible
pains that attend spina-ventosa, and those not less severe that caries
produces in certain cases. If a bone is inflamed, as for example the
sawed extremity of a stump after amputation, this bone which in a
natural state had borne, without transmitting any painful impression,
the action of the saw, becomes as it were a new sensitive organ, to
which the least touch is painful. The animal contractility is nothing
in the osseous system.

The organic properties give life to this system as to all the others.
The sensibility of this kind certainly exists in it; the fluids that
penetrate it are felt, and by virtue of this feeling, those are
appropriated to it which are proper for its nutrition. But is there
in the osseous system a reaction upon these fluids? are there those
insensible oscillations which compose insensible organic contractility?
Its hardness seems to prevent them. But yet the circulation is carried
on there; it performs a constant work, an habitual composition and
decomposition, which can hardly be conceived of without reaction on
the part of the osseous system. Besides this reaction is more slow,
more difficult on account of its structure; and hence without doubt
the slowness, of which we shall speak, in the vital phenomena of the
osseous system. Sensible organic contractility is foreign to it.


_Character of the Vital Properties._

The peculiar life of the bones is composed then of only two vital
properties, organic sensibility and insensible organic contractility.
From these two properties are derived all the vital phenomena
that these organs exhibit, inflammations, formation of tumours,
cicatrization of solutions of continuity, &c. This peculiar life is
remarkable in general, as I have just observed, when compared with
the peculiar lives of the other organs, by its slowness, by the tardy
concatenation of its phenomena. All things being equal as to ages, and
the different proportions of the earthy and cartilaginous substances,
inflammation is more slow there than in the other parts. Callus is
remarkable among the other cicatrices by the length of its formation;
compare an exostosis in its origin, its progress and its development,
with a tumour of the soft parts, a phlegmon for example, and you will
see the difference. Who does not know, that whilst suppuration often
requires only a few days in the other organs, it is whole months in
forming in the middle of the bones? Observe the difference that there
is between a gangrene of the soft parts, in which death takes place in
a short time, with caries and necrosis of the bones, in which a long
period elapses between disease and death of the part. In general we can
say, when inflammation exists in a bone, that it is chronic.


_Sympathies._

This character of the vital properties imprints an analogous one
upon the sympathetic relations of the osseous system with the other
systems. At first the animal contractility and the sensible organic
contractility cannot be put in action in these relations, as they do
not exist in the bones. The animal sensibility being developed in them
with difficulty and slowly by the diseases that essentially affect
them, the sympathies can be brought into action in them only in an
obscure manner. These sympathies then should act essentially upon the
organic sensibility and upon the insensible organic contractility, and
as these two properties are developed slowly, the different sympathies
should not be connected with the acute affections of the other organs,
and this is what is clearly proved by observation. In fact observe
that whilst many other systems respond with great quickness to the
acute diseases of an organ, this, as well as the cartilaginous,
fibro-cartilaginous systems, &c. remain then almost always in inaction.
Let the stomach, the lungs, the brain, &c. be the seat of a severe
acute disease, you see immediately many sympathetic phenomena arise in
the nervous, vascular, muscular, glandular, cutaneous, mucous systems,
&c. &c.; all seem to feel the trouble of the affected organ; each,
according to the vital forces that predominate there, exhibit different
phenomena, which are only aberrations, irregular developments of these
forces; in the animal muscular system, it is the animal contractility
which is especially raised; hence spasms and convulsions; in the
glandular, the serous, the cutaneous, the mucous, &c. the insensible
organic contractility and the organic sensibility principally
experience alterations; hence the different sympathetic derangements of
the secretions, of the sweat, of the exhalations; in the nervous, it
is the animal sensibility which is especially brought sympathetically
into action; hence the wandering or fixed pains in different parts;
in the organic muscular, it is the organic contractility which is
raised; hence the irregular motions of the heart, the stomach and the
intestines. In all the acute diseases of an organ there are always two
orders of symptoms, the one relative to the affected organ, as are the
cough, the pain in the side, the spitting of blood, the difficulty
of respiration, &c. in peripneumonia; the others purely sympathetic
and arising from the relations which connect the vitality of this
organ with that of all the others; now these last are often much more
numerous than the others.

Observe the bones in the midst of all that general sympathetic
derangement of the systems in which life is very active; they undergo
no alteration; their life, more slow than that of the other systems,
is not connected with these phenomena which have an acute character;
neither is that of the cartilages, the fibro-cartilages, the hair, the
aponeuroses, &c. All these systems, remarkable by the same character of
vitality, do not respond to the acute affections of the other systems;
they are not sympathetically affected, during these affections, at
least in an evident manner. Observe all the acute fevers; their
numerous phenomena have an effect only upon those systems in which
life is very active; those in which it is distinguished by an opposite
character, have uniformly no connexion with these phenomena; they are,
if we may so say, calm and tranquil in the midst of the tempest which
agitates the others. Let us take for example the different eruptions
that appear in fevers; it is upon the skin, the mucous surfaces, &c.
that they come; they arise during the fever and they disappear with it;
now the bones, the cartilages, &c. could not, from their kind of life,
admit of this sudden origin and disappearance.

It is then in the slow and chronic affections that we must seek for
examples of sympathies of the osseous, cartilaginous systems, &c. In
the first stages of the venereal disease, in which it is marked only
by acute symptoms, or in which at least its progress is not very slow,
as when it appears in buboes, in inflammations of the urethra, &c. it
has no influence upon the osseous system; it is only when it is of long
standing, when it has, as it were, degenerated, and become chronic,
that it makes the bones the seat of pains, of different tumours, &c.
Besides, I do not know, that we have yet thoroughly analyzed the
osseous sympathies. I have shown only their general character. We
shall understand them better, when we have given more attention to the
relation that there is in diseases between the affection of each organ,
and its kind of vitality.


_Seat of the Vital Properties._

The bones penetrated by saline substances which tend continually to
obey the laws of affinity and attraction, and to make these laws
predominate over those of sensibility and organic mobility, seem
to hold a middle place in living bodies, between these bodies and
inanimate ones. There is truly but one part of their osseous texture
which partakes of the vital phenomena, viz. their cartilaginous
substance; the other part or calcareous substance is foreign to them;
thus the proportion of each of these substances determines in the bones
their degree of life. In infancy, in which the first predominates, in
the early stages of the formation of callus, in which it is exclusively
found, in the softening of the bones in which it remains almost alone,
all the vital phenomena become more evident and more powerful. On the
contrary, as age accumulates in the bones the saline substance, as in
certain animals this accumulation takes place by the natural laws of
ossification in some external portions of the system with calcareous
base, as in the horns of stags, the shells of crustaceous animals,
&c. so life is, if we may so say, successively destroyed in the
bones; it becomes nothing, when this calcareous portion predominates
considerably; this is what happens in the necrosis which produces the
fall of the horns, the casting of the shells of crustaceous animals, &c.

Besides, that which shows the vital energy in an organ, is the
rapidity with which inflammation goes through its periods in it, and
the frequency of this affection, &c. Now in the bones inflammation
is so much the more rapid, in proportion to the greater quantity
of cartilaginous texture they contain; observe the periods of the
formation of the callus in the different ages, periods which are
determined by the duration of the inflammation necessary for its
formation, you will see that in infancy they are short, that they are
much longer in old age, and that often even consolidation does not take
place, whilst it is effected with facility in all the soft parts. The
general weakness no doubt of all the vital forces which takes place
from the effect of age is one cause of this slowness and this rapidity
in the formation of the callus at the two extreme periods of life;
but the different proportions of gelatinous and calcareous substances
contribute much to it also; for when we compare other cicatrices with
this, the cutaneous, for example, we see that age establishes in them
an infinitely less sensible difference as it respects the slowness and
rapidity of this reunion, than in the osseous system. The bones have
not sufficient life to inflame and unite, like the skin, the muscles
also exhibit this phenomenon in a very evident manner. I have seen
an old man, the neck of whose fractured thigh-bone remained a long
time without reunion, and in whom a wound of the face was healed very
speedily by the first intention.

Finally, there is a simple experiment that I have often made, and which
proves as well as the preceding facts, that the cartilage is truly
the animal part of the bone. We know that one of the great attributes
of animal substances, is to contract and exhibit the horny hardening
when burnt; now when the bone is penetrated with its earthy salt, it
has not this kind of combustion; deprived of this salt by an acid, the
cartilaginous parenchyma which remains burns in this manner. The flat
bones in infancy in which this parenchyma predominates, exhibits also
this phenomenon in burning; it forces the calcareous portion, which is
in small quantity to obey the impulse that it gives it, and turns it
in various directions; but in the adult in whom the calcareous portion
is the largest, the bone remains unmoved while the fire penetrates it,
and its whole cartilage is taken away, without its fibres being able to
obey their tendency to the horny hardening which combustion imprints
upon them.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

OF THE ARTICULATIONS OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.

All the bones are united together, and thus form the skeleton. The
manner of their union varies, but whatever it may be, it is known under
the general name of articulation.


I. _Division of the Articulations._

All the articulations can be referred to two general classes. Mobility
is the character of the first, immobility that of the second.

One belongs to all the bones which serve for locomotion, to some of
those destined to internal functions, as the ribs, the lower jaw, &c.
The other is especially met with in the bones, the union of which forms
the cavities designed to defend the organs; this we see in the head,
the pelvis, &c.


_Moveable Articulations. Observations upon their Motions._

I divide moveable articulations into four kinds, the characters
of which are borrowed from the different motions they execute. To
understand this division, it is necessary previously to know the
motions of the articulations in general. These motions can be included
under four species, which are, 1st, opposition; 2d, circumduction; 3d,
rotation; 4th, sliding.

1st. The motion of opposition is that which is made in two opposite
directions, for example, from flexion to extension, from adduction
to abduction, and vice versa. This motion is extensive or limited;
extensive when it is made in all directions, first in the four named
above, then in all the intermediate ones; limited, when it only takes
place from flexion to extension, from adduction to abduction, &c. The
thigh in its articulation with the pelvis enjoys an extensive motion of
opposition. The tibia in its articulation with the femur has a limited
motion of opposition.

2d. Circumduction is the motion in which the bone describes a kind of
cone, the summit of which is in its superior articulation, and the
base in the inferior; so that it is found successively in flexion,
adduction, extension and abduction, or in abduction, extension,
adduction and flexion, according to the motion by which it begins, and
that moreover it goes through all the intermediate directions. Hence we
see that circumduction is a motion composed of all those of opposition,
and in which the bone, instead of moving from one direction to an
opposite one, as in the preceding case, moves from one direction to
another nearest to it, describing thus by its extremity a circle which
is the base of a cone of which I have spoken, and which is so much the
greater as the bone is so much the longer. We easily understand that
among the bones, those only whose motion of opposition is loose, enjoy
that of circumduction.

3d. Rotation is wholly different from the preceding motion. In this
there was locomotion, a moving of the bone from one place to another;
here it remains always in the same place; it only turns upon its axis.
The humerus and the femur enjoy this motion which is simple.

4th. Sliding belongs to all the articulations. It is an obscure motion,
by which two surfaces go in an opposite direction, by sliding as it
were upon each other. In all the other motions, this is met with; but
it often exists without them.

It is easy to understand, from these views upon the articular motions,
the division into genera of the class of moveable articulations. In
fact, there are articulations in which all the motions are united; in
others, there is no rotation; in many rotation and circumduction are
wanting, and opposition exists only in one direction; some have only
rotation. Finally, there are those in which rotation, circumduction and
opposition are nothing, and sliding alone remains.

Hence we see that nature moves here as elsewhere by gradation, that
from the most moveable articulations to those that are the least so,
there are different degrees of decrease, that she descends gradually to
the immoveable articulations, that she is finally reduced to the motion
of sliding alone, like that which exists at the carpus, the tarsus,
&c. There is even an intermediate one between sliding and immobility;
it is the articulation of the symphysis pubis; which can be considered
with that of the humerus as forming the two extremes of the series of
moveable articulations.

All the articulations of which I have spoken are with contiguous
surfaces; this is the general character of those which are moveable.
There is however an exception to this rule; it is the articulation of
the body of the vertebræ, in which there is continuity and mobility.
The symphysis pubis is also in part continuous in its surfaces, and yet
has sometimes obscure motions. Hence arises a division of the moveable
articulations, into those with continuous surfaces, and into those with
contiguous ones.


_Immoveable Articulations._

The immoveable articulations are sometimes with surfaces inserted into
each other, as the bones of the cranium, in which many projections and
depressions reciprocally receive each other; sometimes with surfaces
in juxta-position, as in the articulation of the temporal with the
parietal, the two superior maxillary bones with each other; sometimes
with implanted surfaces, as in the teeth.

All the different divisions that I have mentioned will be easily
understood by the following table; it is not the same as that which
I have given in my treatise on the membranes; I think it presents
a classification a little more useful in this, that it offers for
a characteristic two things essential to be known in all kinds of
moveable articulations, viz. 1st, the relation of the articular
surfaces which characterizes the orders; 2d, the number of motions
of each which distinguishes the genera. There are no orders in the
immoveable articulations because, except the relation of surfaces, the
articulations have not differences sufficient to occasion them to be
sub-divided.


_Table of the Articulations._

                 ┌ CLASSES.       ┌ ORDERS.    ┌        GENERA.
                 │                │            │1st. Extensive Opposition,
                 │                │            │ Circumduction and
                 │                │            │ Rotation.
                 │                │1st. With   │2d. Extensive Opposition
                 │                │ Contiguous │ and Circumduction.
                 │1st. Moveable.  │ Surfaces.  │3d. Limited Opposition.
                 │                │            │4th. Rotation.
                 │                │            └5th. Sliding.
  ARTICULATIONS. │                │2d. With Continuous
                 │                └   Surfaces.
                 │
                 │                ┌1st. With Surfaces
                 │                │   in juxta-position.
                 │                │2d. With Surfaces
                 │                │   inserted
                 └2d. Immoveable. │   into each other.
                                  │3d. With Surfaces
                                  └   implanted.

After having thus divided the articulations, let us offer upon each
class some general observations. But let us first remark that the
preceding table, considered in respect to the moveable articulations
with contiguous surfaces, indicates perfectly the disposition of these
articulations as to luxations, which are so much the more frequent as
the motions are more extensive. The first genus is the most exposed to
it, the last the least so; and the others are more or less so according
to their distance from the first.


II. _Observations upon the Moveable Articulations._

The class of moveable articulations is the most important to be
considered, because their mechanism is the most complicated of the two
orders composing this class, as we have seen. The latter, or that of
the articulations with continuous surfaces, will not be considered in
our general observations, as it embraces only one species of motion,
that of the vertebræ, this motion will be noticed in the examination
of the spine. The order of the moveable articulations with contiguous
surfaces, comprises, as we have said, five genera characterized by
their respective motions.


_First Genus._

Extensive opposition, circumduction and rotation characterize this
genus. The first by the extent and number of its motions. The
articulations of the humerus with the scapula and the femur with the
ilium are examples of it; they even exclusively compose it.

We see why it is at the superior part of the limbs that nature has
placed this genus. A double advantage results from this situation. On
the one hand, very far from the part of the limb immediately exposed
to the action of external bodies, it more easily escapes luxations to
which its want of solidity renders it liable. On the other hand, it
can by this situation give to the limb the motions of a whole which
compensate for those of the inferior articulations, the solidity of
which prevents the power of motion in all directions. For example,
the two articulations of which I have just spoken, are not only the
articulations of the bones that form them, of the humerus and the
femur, but also the articulations of the whole limb, which they direct
in different directions; thus the anchylosis of these articulations
renders the limb completely useless, whilst that of the inferior
articulations only destroys partial motions.

The kind of motion of this genus of articulation requires a rounded
form in the articular surfaces, whether they be concave that receive
and convex that are received. This form is in fact the only one
that can accommodate itself to extensive opposition, rotation and
circumduction united; this is the form of the superior parts of the
humerus with the scapula, and the femur with the os innominatum. The
bone which moves has a convex surface, that which serves for support a
concave one. There are in animals examples of an opposite arrangement:
that is to say that a concavity is moved in all directions upon a
convexity; but this is not found in man.

Though the two limbs have between them the greatest analogy in their
motions, yet there are some differences relative especially to their
respective uses, which in the one are for seizing and repelling bodies,
in the other destined to locomotion. The principal of these differences
is, that rotation and circumduction are found in them in an exactly
inverse ratio. The mechanical reason and advantages of this arrangement
are easily understood.

In the femur the length of the neck which is the lever of rotation,
gives much extent to this motion, which supplies the pronation and
supination that are wanting in the leg; so that every rotation of
the foot is a motion of the whole of the limb. In the humerus on the
contrary, the neck being very short and bringing the axis of the bone
near the centre of the motion, limits rotation, which is less necessary
on account of that of the fore-arm; the motion of the hand without or
within is never communicated but by a part of the limb.

As to circumduction, the length of the neck of the thigh is an obstacle
to it. In fact, let us remark that this motion is much the more easy,
when it is performed by a rectilinear lever, because then the axis of
the motion is the axis of the lever; that on the contrary, if the lever
is angular, the motion becomes so much the more difficult because the
axis of the motion is not that of the lever; and in general we can
say, that the difficulty of the motion is in the direct ratio of the
distance of the two axes.

This being settled, let us observe that the axis of the motion of
circumduction of the thigh is evidently a straight line, obliquely
directed from the head to the condyles, and distant consequently
above from the axis of the bone, the whole length of the neck. Now,
from what has just been said, it is evident, that the difficulty of
circumduction will be in the direct ratio of the length of the neck,
and consequently very great. In the humerus, on the contrary, the neck
being very short, the axis of the bone and that of the motion are
almost the same; hence the facility and extent of the circumduction. We
might fix precisely the relation of these motions by this proportion;
the circumduction of the humerus is to that of the femur, as the length
of the neck of the humerus is to the length of the neck of the femur;
which shows us how much more difficult the circumduction of the femur
is than that of the humerus. To know this, it is sufficient in fact to
know the excess of the length of the neck of the first over that of the
second.

It is easy to perceive the advantages of this very great extent in
the circumduction of the superior limbs destined to seize, and of the
limits placed by nature to that of the inferior limbs destined to
standing and locomotion. We understand also why luxations are more easy
in the first than in the second. The displacement almost always takes
place in fact, in one of the simple motions, the succession of which
forms the compound motion of circumduction, for example, in elevation
or depression, in adduction or abduction, &c. Now all these motions
being carried much further in the humerus than in the femur, the
surfaces are more easily separated.


_Second Genus._

This genus differs from the first by the absence of the motion of
rotation. Opposition and circumduction are alone met with in it. We
find examples of it in the temporal maxillary, sterno-clavicular,
radio-carpal, meta-carpo-phalangeal articulations, &c.

The want of rotation evidently supposes, from what has been said above,
the absence of an osseous head, the axis of which would make, as in the
preceding genus, an angle with the axis of the body of the bone. Thus
in all the bones of the articulations that I have just mentioned, the
articular surface is at the extremity even of the bone, and not upon
the side; the axis is the same in both cases. They form a rectilinear
lever, instead of an angular one.

The articular surfaces are in general, as in the preceding case,
uniform, without eminences and reciprocal depressions; which would
embarrass and even prevent circumduction. In the bone which serves
for support, there is a cavity more or less deep; in the bone which
is moved, there is an analogous convexity. The corresponding surfaces
of the temporal and the inferior maxillary bone, of the bones of the
metacarpus and the first phalanges, are examples of this arrangement.

This articular mode is the most favourably disposed for circumduction,
which is, as we have seen, constantly in the inverse ratio of rotation,
and which consequently has the greatest possible facility when the
lever is rectilinear, a circumstance that destroys rotation. Yet in
many articulations of this genus, circumduction is evidently less
extensive than in the humerus and the femur; but this arises from the
arrangement of the moving powers which being in much greater number
in the articulations of these two bones, compensate for the bad
arrangement of the articular surfaces for circumduction.

In the genus of articulations of which we are treating, there is
always one direction in which the motion of opposition is more easy
than in the others; for example, it is elevation and depression in
the jaw, flexion and extension in the first phalanges, in the wrist,
&c. In general there are two lateral ligaments and the capsule in the
direction in which the motions are most limited, the capsule only in
that in which they are the most extensive.


_Third Genus._

As we advance in the examination of these articular genera, the
extent of their motion diminishes. This has less opposition in many
directions than the preceding, and less circumduction which always
supposes an extensive opposition. Here this opposition is always
limited to one direction only, to that of flexion and extension, for
example.

We find this articular genus especially in the middle of the limbs, as
at the elbow, the knee, the middle of the fingers in the articulations
of the phalanges. Though the bone which composes them, inferiorly can
move by itself but in one direction, yet it borrows from the loose
motions of the superior articulation of the limb, so as to be able to
be turned in every way.

The articular surfaces are found here as in the preceding genus, at
the extremity of the bone, having the same axis as the bone; but they
differ, 1st, in this that there are many eminences and cavities fitted
to each other, an arrangement, which, by permitting the motion in one
direction, prevents it in the others. Very commonly there are two kinds
of round prominences, called condyles, which roll from before behind,
or from without within, &c. upon two analogous cavities, that are
separated by an eminence, which is received in the space between the
condyles, as we see in the femoro-tibial, phalangeal articulations, &c.
2d. The breadth of the surfaces also distinguishes this genus from the
preceding; this breadth insures its solidity, and prevents luxations,
which besides are more to be feared when they happen here where more
ligaments must be broken than elsewhere.

There is always in this genus greater extent of motion on one side,
than on the opposite. In general flexion has always more extended
limits than extension; observe in fact the condyles of the femur, of
the phalanges, &c. they are extended much further in the first than the
second direction; why? because all our principal motions are those of
flexion, and the motions of extension are as it were but to moderate
the first, and have for their object only to bring back the limb to
the position from which it can be bent again. Hence why the number,
and the strength of the fibres are much greater in the flexors than in
the extensors; why the great vascular and nervous trunks are always on
the side of flexion, as we see in the thigh, the leg, the fore-arm,
the phalanges, &c. There is always something which limits the motion
of extension, as the olecranon in the humero-cubital articulation, the
crucial ligaments in the femoro-tibial articulation.

Though in the genus which we are describing, there is no well marked
motion of circumduction, yet when the leg or the fore-arm are in
flexion, they can move laterally and even in the form of a cone, but
not in a very evident manner. In extension this is impossible, because
the lateral ligaments being much stretched, do not yield enough to
allow the bone to incline from one side to the other.


_Fourth Genus._

Every kind of opposition and circumduction is wanting in this genus,
which presents rotation alone, as we see in the articulations of
the ulna with the radius, and the atlas with the odontoid process.
Sometimes it is a concave surface rolling upon a convex one, as at the
lower end of the radius, and at the odontoid process; sometimes it is a
convex surface moving upon a concave one, as at the head of the radius;
there is always a kind of ligament which completes the concave surface,
and which thus forms a ring turning upon the bone, or in which the bone
turns.

Luxations are here very difficult, because the rotation being made upon
the axis of the bone, the ligaments are hardly more distended on one
side than the other, and are hence broken with difficulty, whatever may
be the extent of the motion. The inferior part of the radius forms a
slight exception to this rule, because it is upon the ulna, and not
exactly upon its own axis, that the bone turns in this place.

There is no rotation in the leg as in the fore-arm, because, as we have
seen, that of the thigh which is very extensive, supplies the place of
it; which the humerus could hardly do for the fore-arm, as we know when
this last is anchylosed.


_Fifth Genus._

Every kind of rotation, opposition and circumduction are wanting
in this genus, which is the most numerous, and which embraces the
articulations of the carpus, the metacarpus, the tarsus and metatarsus,
of the vertebræ between themselves by their articular processes, of
the atlas with the occiput, of the humeral extremity of the clavicle,
the sternal of the ribs, and the superior of the fibula. There is only
a kind of slipping more or less obscure, and in which the osseous
surfaces hardly ever leave each other. These surfaces are almost
all plain, very close together, united by a considerable number of
ligaments, and so strong in their connexion, that luxations hardly ever
happen to them. Another reason moreover which renders them difficult,
is that all this genus of articulations belongs almost wholly to short
bones; now we know, that the motion imparted to a bone has a power
of action which is in direct ratio of its length, and in the inverse
of its smallness; for example, the same power applied to the tibial
extremity of the femur, would luxate much more easily the ischiatic
extremity, than if it acted upon the middle of this bone.

As the separate motion of each of the articulations of the fifth genus
is almost nothing, nature usually unites several at the same place, for
the purpose of producing a sensible, general motion, as we see in the
carpus, the tarsus, the vertebræ, &c.; this is also a reason of the
difficulty there is in luxating this genus of articulations. In fact,
how great the general motions may be, two bones, taken separately,
move but little upon each other; now it is only the extent of the
motion of the two separate bones from each other, that can produce the
displacement.


III. _Observations upon the Immoveable Articulations._

We have only pointed out orders in this class, because its varieties
are not sufficiently great to assign genera for them.

1st. The order of immoveable articulations with surfaces in
juxta-position, is met with where the mechanism of the part alone
is almost sufficient to insure the solidity of the bones which are
found only placed at the side of each other, without holding by any
insertion, and having only between them a slight cartilaginous layer;
the superior maxillary bones, wedged in between the malar bones, the
ossa ungues, the ethmoid, the ossa palati, the vomer, and the frontal
bone, are supported more by the general mechanism of the face, than
by any articular attachments that unite them to each other; thus the
squamous portion of the temporal bone supports the parietal, more
by the abutting arches, than by the manner of the union of their
respective surfaces. Remove this general mechanism of the part, you
will soon see all the articulations separate.

2d. The order of immoveable articulations with inserted surfaces,
owes also in some measure its solidity to the general mechanism of
the part; but this mechanism would be insufficient to insure this
solidity; thus the bones, instead of having almost plain surfaces,
exhibit very evident prominences and depressions which are inserted
into each other, as we see in the articulations of the parietal bones
with each other, with the sphenoid, the occipital, the frontal, &c.;
these are called sutures. This order sometimes approximates the
preceding, as in the union of the parietal and frontal bones, which,
reciprocally aiding each other, are supported by this mechanism,
more than by their insertions; sometimes it resembles the following
order, as in the articulation of the occipital and parietal bones, in
which the very deep insertions almost alone insure the solidity of
the union. This order is never seen except upon the edges of the flat
bones; the insertion of these edges compensates for their want of size,
by multiplying the points of contact. The eminences and depressions
forming the insertion are always of an irregular form and size. They
are exactly fitted to each other, they are not alike in two bones of
the same species, taken from two different subjects; so that we cannot
unite to a detached left parietal bone, the right parietal bone of
another individual. There has been much dispute upon the formation
of the sutures; they are an effect of the laws of ossification, an
effect which we can account for no more than we can for all the others,
and all the general phenomena of growth; we shall see the progress
they follow in this formation. This articular order is gradually
effaced with age, and the bones unite together by the ossification of
the thin intermediate cartilage. It is more rare that the preceding
order disappears. I have seen, however, in extreme old age, different
articulations of this order cease to be evident, those of the maxillary
bones between themselves especially.

3d. The order of articulations with implanted surfaces borrows none of
its solidity from the mechanism of the part; it owes it entirely to
the relation of the surfaces, which are so united and embraced by each
other, that displacement is impossible. There is but one example of
this articular order, it is the teeth with the jaws.

Age does not here efface the articulation, and thus confound the two
bones as in the preceding orders, because the medium of union is the
palatine membrane, which belongs to the mucous system, and which by its
organization has no tendency to ossification; whereas in the preceding
cases, the intermediate cartilage has a natural disposition to become
encrusted with the phosphate of lime.


IV. _Of the Means of Union between the Articular Surfaces._

The articular surfaces would soon separate, if different organs did not
retain them in place. These organs are the cartilages and the membranes
for the immoveable articulations, the ligaments and the muscles for the
moveable.


_Union of the Immoveable Articulations._

The two first orders of immoveable articulations, those with inserted
surfaces and those with surfaces in juxta-position, have cartilages
between the osseous surfaces, the breadth and thickness of which
are found so much the greater in proportion as they are examined in
subjects nearest infancy. Almost all the bones of the head are held
together in this manner, which allows them to yield a little, and
consequently prevents their fracture.

In the articulations of the pelvis, there are besides the cartilages,
ligaments; but as these articulations perform in certain cases small
sliding motions, we can consider them as intermediate between the
moveable and immoveable articulations; it is on this account that they
have the two kinds of organs especially destined to strengthen the
articular surfaces of each of the classes, viz. the cartilages and the
ligaments.

The immoveable articulations with implanted surfaces, an order which
comprehends only the teeth, have nothing between the surfaces as a
means of union, but a mucous membrane, the palatine. Hence why in the
swellings of this membrane, in scorbutic affections, after the use of
mercury, &c. the teeth become loose.


_Union of the Moveable Articulations._

The moveable articulations with contiguous surfaces have the ligaments
especially as a means of union, which are found in the five genera,
but under different forms which will be examined hereafter. This
kind of organ unites much suppleness with great resistance, a double
attribute which it derives from its peculiar texture, and which renders
it very proper for this function. Let us observe however that these
two properties are in an inverse ratio in the two extreme ages of
life, that suppleness is the companion of infancy, that stiffness and
resistance are the character of the ligaments in old age. Hence in
part the multiplicity of motions in one age, and their slowness and
difficulty in the other.

The cartilages are not in this articular order, as in the preceding,
means of union, but means of motion, by their smooth and polished
surfaces.

As to the synovial membrane that is found exclusively in this order,
such is its extreme tenuity, that it can hardly be considered as
uniting the surfaces, and its use appears to be confined to the
exhalation of synovia.

It is not the same with the muscles; they can be considered as forming
at the same time around the moveable articulations, a power for the
whole of the bone, and a resistance for its extremities, which they
prevent from being displaced, by forming around them supports, the
efficiency of which is in proportion to the efforts that are made to
displace these extremities. In fact, it is in the great motions that
these efforts are the most considerable; now then the neighbouring
muscles of articulation strongly contracted, hard during their
contractions, have a powerful tendency to prevent the osseous extremity
from abandoning that which corresponds with it. In rest when the
relaxed muscles offer but little resistance, the effort for support
is nothing. A paralyzed limb can be luxated much more easily than
another, by external violence.

The order of moveable articulations with contiguous surfaces, has as a
means of union, a substance, the nature of which is between that of the
ligaments and that of the cartilages.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.

There is no system in which anatomists have traced in a more accurate
manner than in this, the different states in the different periods of
life. The remarkable difference of a bone examined in the first months
when gelatine almost alone composes it, compared with a bone of an
adult in which the calcareous substance predominates, has especially
arrested their attention upon this point. Let us examine the phenomena
of ossification in all the ages; these phenomena should be considered
during and after growth. In general, while this continues, there are
some portions of the osseous system not ossified, as the neck of the
femur, for example; ossification is not complete, the bones are not
perfectly developed until towards the sixteenth or eighteenth year, and
sometimes even later.


I. _State of the Osseous System during Growth._

We commonly distinguish three states in the development of the bones,
viz. the mucous, the cartilaginous and the osseous states.


_Mucous State._

The mucous state may be considered as existing at two periods: 1st. In
the first days of the development of the embryo, a period in which
the whole of its organs forms only a homogeneous and mucous mass, in
which it is not possible to distinguish any line of demarcation, and in
which the parenchymas of nutrition alone exist. All the organs are then
of the same nature; the bones are in fact mucous like all the other
organs, if by this word we understand a state in which the cellular
texture existing alone with the vessels and the nerves, is penetrated
by so large a quantity of juices, that it has the form of a mucilage,
and gives the appearance of it to the embryo. 2d. We may understand by
the words mucous state, that more advanced period of osseous nutrition,
in which the bones can be already distinguished, seen through the
transparency that the other parts of the limb still have, and in which
they have a consistence much greater than that of the parts which
surround them; now this state is only the commencement of that of
cartilage; for the parenchyma of nutrition takes the cartilaginous
character when it begins to be penetrated by gelatine, and it is in
fact penetrated by this substance when it has more consistence, since
it is that which gives it this consistence, and hence an existence
distinct from the surrounding parts. If in the early periods, this
cartilage is softer, if it flattens under the finger when pressed, if
it even has an appearance partly mucous, it is because the gelatine is
not yet in sufficiently large proportion, and because the nutritive
parenchyma still predominates; gradually its quantity increases, and
then the cartilaginous nature is more evidently developed.

It follows hence that the bones have three periods in their
development; one is common to them with all the other organs; it is the
mucous period; the two others especially characterize them; these are
the cartilaginous and osseous periods. Let us examine their phenomena.


_Cartilaginous State._

All the bones are cartilaginous before taking their last form.
This state of cartilage begins at a period that is difficult to be
determined; it is when on the one hand the circulating system begins to
carry gelatine and present it to the organs, and when on the other the
organic sensibility of the parenchyma of nutrition of the bones is put
in relation with this substance. Then the consistence of the bone is
constantly increasing, because the gelatine is constantly accumulating;
now it accumulates in the same direction that the phosphate of lime
afterwards takes; that is to say, in the long bones it is in the
middle of the body, in the flat bones it is in the centre, and in the
short ones it is in the centre also, that this substance is at first
exhaled, which afterwards extends gradually to the extremities of the
first, the circumference of the second and the surface of the third.
I would observe however that we do not see, during the formation of
the cartilaginous bone, those longitudinal striæ in the long bones,
radiated ones in the flat, irregularly crossed ones in the short, which
distinguish the osseous state in its formation, and which seem to
indicate to the eye the course of the phosphate of lime.

The cartilaginous state exhibits a peculiarity that distinguishes
it from the osseous state; it is that all the bones that are to be
afterwards united by means of cartilage, such as those of the cranium,
the face, the vertebral column and the pelvis make only one piece;
whilst all those that are to be held together by ligaments, whose
articulations are consequently moveable, are found very distinct, as
the femur, the tibia, the clavicle, &c.

The broad bones, those of the cranium especially, do not exhibit in
so distinct a manner the cartilaginous state. Their appearance, at
this period of ossification, is even rather membranous. It arises from
this; as they are found interposed between the periosteum and the
dura mater, and as their tenuity is very great, we can with difficulty
distinguish them on the interior of these two membranes. But when we
dissect the parts with care, we can distinguish the bone yet soft, from
this double covering.

The cartilaginous state appears in the clavicle, the scapula, the
ribs, before being discoverable in the other bones in which it is
afterwards seen. When we examine the bones in this state, we find them
of different consistence and solidity; where the exhalation of gelatine
has commenced, they are incompletely cartilaginous; as we go from this
point, they partake more or less of the mucous state. The cartilaginous
bone has no internal cavity, no medullary system, &c.


_Osseous State._

When the whole bone is cartilaginous, and even when some points appear
to be still mucous, the exhalation of calcareous substance begins, and
then the osseous state manifests itself; the following is the manner;
the bone becomes more dense, then of a deeper colour, and finally
of a very evident yellow in its middle, that is to say where the
ossification should begin; gradually a red point appears; these are the
vessels that begin to receive the red portion of the blood, and not to
be developed as some anatomists pretend, to be hollowed out according
to their expression, by the force of the impulse of the heart. They
always existed; the white fluids alone penetrated them before, then the
red globules are admitted into them. At the same time the neighbouring
parts are encrusted with calcareous substance. This period is then
remarkable in two particulars, viz. in respect to the entrance of the
blood into the cartilaginous bone, and in regard to the exhalation of
the phosphate of lime. These two phenomena are always inseparable; when
there is redness in one part of the cartilages, there are also osseous
points; this is observed not only in common ossification, but also in
those which are not so, such as the ossifications of the cartilages
of the larynx, of the ribs, &c. When we examine the progress of the
exhalation of the earthy substance, we see always in the bones, whether
long, flat or short, a very red vascular layer, between the cartilage
and the portion of ossified bone. This layer seems to serve as a
precursor to the osseous state. Why do the vessels of the bones which
before had admitted only white fluids, receive then red globules? It
is not, as Boerhaave would have said, had he treated of ossification,
because their caliber increases, but because the sum of their organic
sensibility increasing, they are then found in relation with the red
portion, which until then was foreign to them. Their caliber might be
treble or quadruple the diameter of the red globules, but these would
not enter if the organic sensibility repelled them, as the larynx
rises against a body which attempts to enter it, though this body may
be infinitely less than the glottis. It is by an increase of organic
sensibility, that must also be explained how the bone, until then a
stranger to calcareous substance, being in relation only with the
gelatine, appropriates also to itself the first of these substances,
and is penetrated with ease.

I will observe only that there is this difference between the
exhalation of the two, that the first comes immediately from the red
portion of the blood, since wherever it is deposited, there is, as I
have said, blood vessels; whilst the second appears to come immediately
from the white fluids, since the vessels of the tendons, the cartilages
and the other parts that they nourish, do not evidently receive in
their natural state any red globules, and all that circulates in them
appears to be white.

The osseous state commences with the end of the first month in the
clavicle, the ribs, &c.; it is a little more slow in the other bones;
we know not its precise period. The following is its progress in the
three kinds of bones.


_Progress of the Osseous State in the Long Bones._

We distinguish at first in the middle of these bones, a small
osseous cylinder, very slender in its centre, enlarging towards the
extremities, hollow in the interior for the rudiments of the medullary
system, perforated by a nourishing foramen whose size is then in
proportion very great, receiving also a very large vessel. This osseous
cylinder, at first very slender in comparison with the cartilaginous
extremities of the bone, is in a very evident disproportion to them in
this respect; it is formed of very delicate fibres, and is gradually
enlarged and extended, until it reaches near the extremities where
it is found at birth; the most of these extremities are not then
bony. Some time after, and at a period which varies in the different
bones, there is developed in these extremities an osseous point which
begins at the centre, and which is always preceded by the passage of
the blood in the vessels. These new germs increase at the expense of
the cartilage which is gradually lessened between the body and the
extremity of the bone; at the end of some time there remains only a
slight partition which ossification also seizes upon; so that the bone
is then wholly osseous from one extremity to the other. The secondary
points which are developed in the different apophyses, also unite; so
that its substance is everywhere homogeneous. It is not until the age
of sixteen or eighteen years, that nature has completely finished this
work.


_Progress of the Osseous State in the Broad Bones._

The mode of origin of ossification varies in this kind of bones. Those
which are symmetrical, have always two points or more, which correspond
upon each side of the median line; sometimes one of them is found upon
this line. When these points of ossification are in equal number, they
are always upon the sides; if they are in unequal number, one of them
is upon the line.

The irregular bones sometimes have but one of them, as in the parietal;
at other times many appear in them, as in the temporal; but there is
never a similar arrangement among them; only they correspond with those
of the opposite bone.

At the first point of ossification in a broad bone, we perceive at
first reddish spots, then we observe the phosphate of lime spreading in
rays from the centre to the circumference of the bone. The osseous rays
are very evident upon the bones of the cranium. Portions not ossified
at first fill their interstices, which new rays afterwards occupy. All
terminate in an unequal manner, without touching, so that by separating
an ossified portion of a broad bone from the membranous portion to
which it belongs, its circumference looks cut like the extremity of a
comb; hence, as we shall see, the origin of sutures.

The delicacy of these bones is extreme in the early periods; they have
not then any of the texture of the cells. At birth but few of the
osseous centres are yet united; cartilaginous and membranous spaces
separate them; these spaces are greater towards the angles than towards
the edges, and generally at points the most distant from the primitive
osseous centres. The bones with many points of ossification are formed
of separate pieces, more or less distant from each other. Those with
one point only, have but one piece.

After birth these bones extend more and more, their thickness and
hardness increase; they are divided into two compact layers, the space
between which is filled by the texture of the cells; gradually they
touch at their edges, and then the sutures are formed in the cranium;
for there is this difference between their ossification and that of
the long bones, that it takes place always from the centre to the
circumference, and that new osseous points are not developed at the
circumference to meet those of the centre. But when this happens, the
union does not then take place as in the long bones, but sutures are
formed; and it is this which occasions the ossa wormiana, which are so
much the larger as the osseous point is the sooner developed, because
it has had time to extend itself more, before meeting the general
ossification of the bone.

When a broad bone is developed by many points and there exists upon its
surface an articular surface, it is usually the centre in which all the
points unite at the period in which ossification terminates; we see
this in the cotyloid cavity, in the condyle of the occipital bone, &c.

There is often in the broad bones two well marked periods for their
ossification; it is so in those which, like the sacrum and sternum, are
developed by a great number of points. These points begin at first to
unite into three or four principal pieces which divide the bone; this
is the first period; then much later, the union of the pieces takes
place; this is the second period.


_Progress of the Osseous State in the Short Bones._

The short bones remain in general longer cartilaginous than the others.
Often at birth many are still so, those of the tarsus and carpus in
particular. The body of the vertebræ is ossified sooner; a point is
developed at the centre, and extends over the whole surface.

These phenomena are nearly analogous to those of the ossification of
the extremities of the long bones, which the short bones resemble so
much. After birth, the whole cartilaginous portion, is, if we may so
say, invaded by the calcareous substance, which mixes with it, and
there is finally only the articular cartilages left.

There are bones, as the occipital and sphenoid, which partake of the
character of the broad and short bones; their ossification is mixed,
and follows the mode of one or the other, according to the part of the
bone that we examine.


II. _State of the Osseous System after its Growth._

The bones, having become completely ossified, continue to undergo
different phenomena which anatomists have too much neglected. The
general growth in height is terminated when ossification is complete;
and it even appears that the term of these two is nearly the same; but
that in breadth continues for a long time after; compare the small and
slender body of a young man of eighteen years, with the stout and well
proportioned one of a man of forty, and you will see the difference.
The bones follow the general law; their nutrition is prolonged for
their thickness, when that for their length ceases. It appears that
then the vessels which penetrate by the foramina of the first and
second order, do not contribute to this nutrition, which draws its
materials from those of the third; now, as we know that these very
superficial vessels are arrested in the external fibres of the bone,
and do not penetrate within, we understand, 1st, how, the growth going
on without, the bone increases in thickness; 2d, how this increase
takes place especially on the compact texture, the proportional
thickness of which is in the direct ratio of the age, as we may see
by inspecting the different bones of the child, the adult and the old
person.

This external growth has made it believed that the periosteum
contributes to it especially by the ossification of its layers; but we
shall see in the article upon this membrane, what opinion should be
entertained upon this subject.

It is principally at this period in which the work of nutrition seems
spread upon the osseous surface, that the different eminences, which
are scattered over this surface, become more evident; then especially
all the prominences of insertion become more prominent; there is
in respect to these eminences a remarkable difference between the
skeleton of a child and that of a full grown man. In the fœtus they
hardly exist, as we see particularly by the different apophyses of the
vertebræ, the spinous especially. As these eminences are generally the
most distant parts from the primitive osseous centres, it appears that
it is to this circumstance that must be attributed the slowness of
their formation, since ossification always goes from points where it
begins, to the most distant ones.

When the bone has all its dimensions it still continues to be the
seat of a very active nutrition; exhalation constantly brings to it
gelatinous and calcareous substances which absorption afterwards takes
up; so that it is continually composed and recomposed. The experiment
with madder evidently proves this; if we feed an animal for some time
upon this, the bones become red much more easily, in proportion as
the animal is younger; so that by amputating a limb after some time,
the bones have an appearance wholly different from what is natural
to them; if, after this amputation, we discontinue the use of the
madder for some time, and then amputate another limb, the bones will
be found to have entirely resumed their natural colour; now we know
that the calcareous substance is the vehicle of the colouring matter,
since while the bones are only cartilaginous the madder has no effect
upon them. The calcareous substance is then alternately furnished and
taken away from the bones. Besides, the formation and resolution of
exostoses, the softening and brittleness of the bones, the phenomena
of the production of callus, &c. are they not an evident proof of
the exhalation and absorption of this principle? It appears clearly
that the urinary system is the way by which nature gets rid of the
calcareous and even of the gelatinous substance. It would be curious
to analyze accurately the urine of ricketty patients, and that of
those affected with cancer; it is probable that the first of these
substances predominates in the urine of the first, and the second in
that of the others; I know of no positive experiments upon the subject.

Can we, by giving to patients gelatine or the phosphate of lime,
restore to their bones the suppleness or solidity which they have lost?
No, because it is necessary not only to introduce these substances into
the economy but also to restore to the bones their peculiar organic
sensibility which they no longer have, and which, by placing these
substances in relation to them, would enable them to appropriate these
to their own nourishment. The blood might be loaded with earthy and
gelatinous principles, and the bones would repel these principles, so
long as their sensibility was not in relation with them.

The double motion of nutrition continues always in the bones, as we
advance in age; but its proportions change. The gelatine is constantly
diminishing and the calcareous substance constantly increasing.
Finally, in extreme old age this last predominates so much, that it
would destroy their life, if general death did not take place before
that of the bones.

It is to this that must be attributed the greyish colour that these
organs then take; hence also their constantly increasing weight; hence
consequently the difficulty of the motions of the limbs, since at the
same time that the force of the muscular powers is diminished by age,
the osseous resistance which they have to overcome increases.

At this period of life, the calcareous substance predominates so
much in the economy, that it is thrown upon different organs, such
as the arteries, the cartilages, the tendons, which then take the
osseous character. We might say that by accumulating in our parts this
substance foreign to life, nature wishes to prepare them insensibly for
death.

In general, it is those organs whose nutritive substance is gelatine,
which have the greatest tendency to be placed in relation with the
calcareous substance, and consequently to be encrusted with it. Hence
why the cartilages especially are ossified; why those of the sutures
disappearing, the bones of the cranium become continuous; why the
larynx is finally almost all osseous; why the cartilages of the ribs
are often as solid as the ribs themselves; why oftentimes many vertebræ
united form a more or less considerable continuous mass. I would
observe however that the arteries, which have so great a tendency to
ossification, are not so evidently gelatinous as many other substances
which ossify much less easily, as the tendons for example.


III. _Peculiar Phenomena of the Development of the Callus._

Nothing is easier after what has been said upon the osseous nutrition,
than to understand the formation of the callus. We know that it has
three periods, 1st, the development of the fleshy granulations; 2d,
their change into cartilage; 3d, the change of this cartilage into
bone. This triple phenomenon takes place in a space of time that varies
according to the age, the fracture, the kind of bone, &c. but which is
in general longer than that of the other cicatrices.

The development of fleshy granulations is a phenomenon common to
every species of organ which has experienced a solution of continuity
and whose divided edges are not in immediate contact. Here these
granulations arise from every part of the divided surface, from the
periosteum, the compact texture and that of the cells, the last
especially. Those of one side unite to those of the opposite. Thus far
the osseous cicatrix does not differ from that of the other parts. This
state corresponds with the mucous state of natural ossification. As the
fleshy fibres are but the extension of the nutritive parenchyma, they
have its vital forces; their organic sensibility follows the same laws
as in ordinary nutrition; at first it is in relation with gelatine;
this is then exhaled; then commences the cartilaginous state; then the
osseous cicatrix takes a peculiar character, which distinguishes it
from that of the other organs.

At the end of a longer time, the organic sensibility increases in the
parenchyma of cicatrization which the fleshy granulations form; then
these become in relation with the calcareous substance which comes to
the bone, and which they had until then repelled; they admit it then,
as well as the red portion of the blood which always precedes it in
every species of ossification.

Hence we see that the callus is cellular and vascular in the first
period; that in the second it contains cellular texture and vessels,
with gelatine; that in the third, it has cellular texture, vessels, and
gelatine, with calcareous substance.

It has not the regular forms of the sound bone, because the parenchyma
of cicatrization arising irregularly upon the osseous surfaces, the
exhalation and absorption of gelatine cannot be made in a precise and
regular manner. The callus is so much the larger in proportion to the
separation of the ends of the bone, because the fleshy granulations
having had more space to go over in order to meet, are more extensive,
and consequently have absorbed more nutritive substance.

If the constant motion of the fractured ends prevents on each side
the granulations, or what is the same thing, the two parenchymas of
cicatrization from uniting, then, notwithstanding the exhalation of
the nutritive substances in each of them, the bone does not unite, and
hence the preternatural articulations.

Callus is formed with difficulty when the ends divided and laid
bare, suppurate with the neighbouring parts, as happens in compound
fractures, because the formation of pus expends the nutritive
substances destined to repair the fracture. The further considerations
upon this singular production belong to pathology.

I have not exposed in this chapter the ideas of the ancients, who
thought that the bones were formed by the hardening of an osseous
juice, the existence of which there is nothing to demonstrate; nor
those of Haller, who imagined that the heart hollowed out arterial
channels in the osseous substance by its own impulse, and hardened this
substance by the pulsation of the arteries; nor those of Duhamel, who
made every thing depend upon the periosteum; I refer to various works
that have a thousand times refuted these opinions.

Without refuting any one in particular, I would remark that they have
one fundamental error, viz. that of considering osseous nutrition in
an insulated manner, of not presenting it as a division of general
nutrition, of admitting for its explanation reasonings only applicable
to the bones, and which are not derived as consequences from those
which serve to establish the nutrition of all the organs. Let us
never lose sight of this essential principle, upon which rest all the
phenomena of the economy, viz. that over a multitude of effects, a very
small number of causes only presides. Let us mistrust every explanation
which is partial and mutilated, which circumscribes the resources of
nature according to the limits of our weak understandings.


IV. _Peculiar Phenomena of the Development of the Teeth._

The teeth, differing in part by their texture, from the other bones,
have also a peculiar mode of nutrition which we shall now examine. But
as the knowledge of this supposes that of the general structure of the
teeth, it is proper to explain here that structure, referring their
description to the examination of the bones of the face.


_Organization of the Teeth._

The teeth are formed by two substances, one external, of a peculiar
nature, called enamel, the other internal, which is the common base of
it, and the texture of which is the same as that of the other bones.
They have besides a cavity which contains a spongy substance, as yet
but little known.


_Hard Portion of the Teeth._

The enamel of the tooth is only seen around the crown; some anatomists
have thought that it extended a little upon the root, an opinion
founded no doubt upon the extreme whiteness that the root often has in
detached teeth, and which makes it impossible to distinguish the line
of demarcation. But a very simple experiment proves this demarcation;
it consists in macerating the tooth in diluted nitric acid. The acid
immediately attacks both the root and the crown which it softens; but
the first becomes yellow like almost all animal substances exposed to
its action, whilst the other preserves its colour, and even becomes
whiter. This experiment also proves that their respective natures are
essentially different.

The enamel, thick on the top of the crown, grows thinner towards the
root, an arrangement required by its use, which is to defend the tooth,
to support principally the efforts of mastication, which are made
especially upon the top of the crown.

This substance hard, compact, particularly when it has remained a long
time in the air, acted upon with difficulty by the file, is composed
of very close fibres, the direction of which cannot be traced. The
medullary oil does not appear to penetrate it; it does not burn, but
breaks by the action of fire, and is thus separated from the other
substance, which, exposed to heat, at first becomes black, then burns
like the other bones and gives out the same odour.

Is the enamel organized, or is it only a fluid which, oozing at
first from the external surface of the tooth, afterwards becomes
there hardened and concrete? This question is not I think easy to
be resolved. The enamel has in fact attributes which seem equally
favourable to both these opinions. On the one hand it is sensible,
like every thing that is organized; it gives us, much more evidently
than the hair or the nails, the sensation of bodies which strike it.
The diluted acids, the vegetable especially, raise its sensibility so
much, that the least touch becomes very painful a long time after their
use. The teeth are then, as we call it, on edge. On the other hand the
enamel has many characters that seem to denote a want of organization.
1st. It never inflames, or becomes the seat of any tumour, or any
alteration which softens its texture; it never experiences any
alteration, which by raising its life, renders it more sensible than in
a natural state, as happens to the hair, for example, which ordinarily
insensible, has a very great vital activity in the plica polonica. In
fact we often judge of the vitality of organs more by their morbid
alterations, than by their natural state. 2d. It appears that there
does not take place in the enamel alternate exhalation and absorption
of nutritive matters, or at least if it does, it is not sensible.
Rubbing wears away this substance, which is never replaced; this is
remarkable in old people, and in those who are in the habit of often
striking their teeth together. We know that we file the enamel like an
inorganic body, and that it is not reproduced, whilst the hair and the
nails evidently grow after being cut. File the extremity of a long bone
after amputation; fleshy granulations will soon grow upon the filed
surface; the action of the instrument will be a stimulus which will
develop the vital phenomena.

The osseous portion of the tooth composes the whole of the root and the
interior of the crown; it is formed by the compact texture, very dense,
having great resemblance to that of stone. It has none of the texture
of the cells. Its fibres, very close to each other, have various
directions, very difficult to trace, but which in general follow
that of the roots; it is necessary, in order to see this direction
perfectly, to soften the teeth in an acid.

Each tooth has a cavity situated in the crown, of the same form as the
crown, diminishing in diameter as we advance in age, communicating
externally by small canals, the number of which is equal to that of the
distinct roots of the tooth, and which open at the end of these roots.
This cavity is lined by a very delicate membrane on which the vessels
ramify, and which, with its opposite face, covers the marrow.


_Soft Portion of the Tooth._

This is a spongy substance which appears to be formed by the
interlacing of the vessels and nerves belonging to each tooth, but
the nature of which is not yet well understood; we know only that it
has a very great animal sensibility equal to that of the medullary
organ. This is proved, 1st, by the pains of carious teeth in which the
marrow is bare, and which are, as we know, extremely acute; 2d, by the
introduction of a probe into the opening occasioned by caries, this
produces no pain until it comes to the marrow, and then it is extreme;
3d, by opening a socket of a very young animal that has not yet cut its
teeth. At this age the marrow is very considerable and the tooth being
small in proportion, it is easy to raise the tooth without injuring it,
because it has as yet no root and the opening at the base of the crown
is very large. The tooth being raised and the marrow thus laid bare,
if it is irritated in any way the animal gives signs of the most acute
pain. I have often made this experiment, always easily done, on account
of the want of thickness of the osseous layers which then form the
sockets.

The teeth have remarkable sympathies, which extend not only to the
solid part, but also to the marrow. As this is much greater in
proportion in the early ages, as it is almost the predominant part
of the tooth, these sympathies are then more numerous and evident.
In these sympathies, sometimes the animal and sometimes the organic
properties are brought into action.

The sympathies of animal sensibility are evident in those pains of
which the teeth become the seat from the action of cold or moisture
upon the cutaneous system; in those produced in the face and the
head by the caries of a tooth. Fauchart relates a case of obstinate
hemicrania, which was immediately removed by the extraction of a tooth.
The sensibility of the ear and the eyes is changed in some violent
cases of tooth ache. The animal contractility is also brought into
action in the sympathies of the teeth; nothing is more frequent in
dentition, than convulsions of the voluntary muscles. Tissot speaks of
a spasm of the muscles of the jaw, which was cured by the extraction of
two carious teeth, and of a convulsion in the muscles of the neck that
occasioned death, the primitive source of which was in a decayed tooth.

The organic sympathies are not less often produced by affections of the
teeth. Spasmodic vomiting, diarrhœa, frequency of the pulse, oftentimes
involuntary evacuation of urine, phenomena, over which the sensible
organic contractility of the stomach, the intestines, the bladder and
the heart presides, are the frequent effects of dentition and violent
pains of the teeth, especially of the first. The insensible organic
contractility, and the organic sensibility are brought sympathetically
into action in the enlargements of the parotid gland, in the general
swelling of the face, in the increased secretion of saliva and
sometimes in the erysipelatous inflammations which take place from an
acute affection of the teeth.

The sympathies of the teeth often take place between the two
corresponding teeth of the same row or of the two rows. My first upper
molar tooth of the left side is a little carious; from time to time it
gives me pain, then invariably the first molar tooth of the right side
becomes as painful, though it is sound. There are other cases in which
a tooth being painful below, sympathetic pains are felt in that which
is above, and vice versa.

The structure of the teeth having been explained, let us see how their
different substances are developed. This subject of osseous nutrition
does not appear to me to have been clearly illustrated by any author.
I shall attempt to explain it better. There are two dentitions, one
is provisional and limited to the first age, the other belongs to the
whole life; each should be considered before, during, and after the
cutting of the teeth.


_First Dentition considered before Cutting._

The phenomena of dentition before the period of cutting are these; the
jaws of the fœtus are closed the whole length of their upper edge; they
appear to be homogeneous at first view; but examined in their interior,
they exhibit a row of small membranous follicles, separated by delicate
partitions, disposed like the teeth of which they are to serve as the
germ, and having the following arrangement.

The membrane which serves as a covering to the follicle forms a sac
without an opening, which lines at first all the parietes of the
socket, to which it is attached by elongations. At the place where the
vessels and nerves enter, this sac leaves the socket, becomes detached,
is folded into the form of a canal which accompanies the vascular and
nervous bundle, and afterwards spreads out upon the marrow of the tooth
which is the termination of the bundle.

It follows from this that this membrane has the general conformation of
the serous membranes, in the shape of some kinds of night-caps. It has
two portions, the one attached and lining the socket, the other loose
and covering the marrow, as for example, the pleura has a costal and a
pulmonary portion. The marrow and the vessels, though contained in its
duplicature, are in truth found without the cavity, which is lubricated
by a simple exhalation. I have found that this exhalation was like
that of the serous membranes, essentially of an albuminous nature; the
action of the nitric acid, that of alkohol and of fire incontestably
prove it. Subjected to the action of one of these agents, especially
the first, the membrane whitens immediately. The layer of albumen which
covers it becomes concrete and coagulated, as when we make a similar
experiment upon a serous surface.

The marrow, very considerable at this period, is found suspended, like
a bunch of grapes, from the extremity of the vessels and the nerves.

It is upon the medullary portion of the membrane of the follicle, and
upon the surface of its loose extremity, that the first osseous point
is developed; it soon extends, and takes precisely the form of the top
of the crown, which it is afterwards to form, that is to say, that it
is quadrilateral in the molar teeth, pointed in the canine, and wedge
shaped in the incisors. Developed at first nearest the gums, it extends
afterwards along the vascular and nervous stem, it is moulded upon it
as it approaches the part of the alveolus where it enters; so that
it exhibits on this side a concave surface which embraces the pulpy
portion of the membrane, and adheres by several vascular elongations;
and as this portion is loose, the first rudiment of the tooth floats
also in the cavity of the membrane, as we can see very well by cutting
the alveolar portion of this membrane, after having destroyed the
corresponding part of the alveolus.

The following consequences result from this kind of development; 1st.
The crown is first formed, and the root is not produced but as the
ossification in length advances upon the portion of membrane lining the
vascular and nervous bundle. 2d. As all the vessels that come to the
tooth enter at its internal surface, and as the external is entirely
free in the cavity of the membrane, the ossification in thickness
is made especially at the expense of the internal cavity which is
constantly contracting, as well as the marrow, an arrangement, the
reverse of that of the other bones, the ossification of which commences
at a point placed in the centre of the cartilage, and which at first
solid in the middle, afterwards become hollow for the medullary
cavities and those of the cells, which are always enlarging. 3d. After
the ossification of the tooth, the portion of the membrane of the
follicle which lined the alveolus, remains the same, whilst that its
portion corresponding with the marrow, originally free at the other
side, becomes adherent on this side to the whole dental cavity which it
lines, of which it forms the membrane noticed above in the article on
the structure of the teeth, and which is thus found between the marrow
and the osseous substance. 4th. The marrow of the tooth is the part
first formed, and the most considerable in the first periods of life.
It appears that the osseous substance is next formed, and that the
enamel afterwards arises on the exterior of this. I have not yet been
able to make evident the manner of its origin.

It is difficult to ascertain at what period the membraneous follicle is
formed; that of the first ossification appears to be from the fourth
to the fifth month. At the time of birth, we find the twenty teeth of
the first dentition already advanced; the whole crown is formed; the
beginning of the root appears also in the form of a broad tube, with
extremely delicate parietes, and which is constantly becoming longer
and thicker; when it reaches the bottom of the socket, the tooth
immediately appears externally as this is too narrow to contain it.

The number of teeth, less in the first than in the second dentition,
gives a peculiar form to the jaws of the fœtus and the infant,
especially to the lower one, which is less elongated in front, and
consequently wider in proportion than in the adult, in whom in order
to receive all the teeth, the alveolar border must necessarily be more
extended. This arrangement of the lower jaw has a great influence in
the expression of the physiognomy.


_First Dentition considered at the period of Cutting._

The following phenomena take place about the sixth or seventh month
after birth, very rarely sooner, still more rarely before birth, though
there are examples of this, as is proved by the history of Louis XIV.
At first the two small incisor teeth of the lower jaw appear, sometimes
together, sometimes separately; soon after the corresponding incisors
of the superior jaw. A month or two later, the four other incisors
are cut. At the end of the first year, the four canine teeth usually
appear. At the end of the second, or often later, two molar are cut
in each jaw and two others soon follow. Each cutting almost always
begins in the lower jaw. At the age of four years, four and a half,
sometimes five or six, always at a very uncertain period, there appear
below two other molars and then two above, which complete the number
of twenty-four teeth forming the first dentition; all these except the
last four fall out and are replaced by new ones.

The following is the mechanism of this first dentition; the
ossification extending constantly towards the root, the tooth can no
longer be contained in the socket; it pierces the alveolar portion of
the membrane and the mucous membrane of the mouth and an intermediate
medullary texture that separates them, with much ease, as this triple
layer gradually becomes thinner as the cutting approaches. Is this
phenomenon owing only to the mechanical pressure of the tooth? I think
that there is another cause; for observe that here the membranes are
very little raised before rupturing; whilst that in polypi and other
tumours that sometimes arise under the membrane of the gums, it is
infinitely more stretched, still it does not break, but is only lifted
up. The mechanism of the opening of the gums is not more known than the
principle of the severe accidents which are sometimes connected with
it. The sac which formed the original membrane of the follicle being
thus open, its portion which lines the socket unites to the membrane
of the mouth, becomes continuous with it and at the same time adheres
intimately to the neck of the tooth; and as during the development
of the root, the internal face of this membranous portion, at first
loose as we have seen, has gradually contracted adhesions with it, it
follows that this root is found fastened between the alveolar portion
which lines its exterior, and the medullary portion which covers the
interior; it is this which gives it solidity. As the adhesions of
the membrane increase, we can less easily distinguish it. It is rare
that in the first dentition the formation of the root is finished as
completely as in the second; its internal cavity remains also very
broad, and the marrow is more developed.


_Second Dentition considered before Cutting._

It is necessary, as in the preceding case, to distinguish the nutritive
phenomena into those which take place before, during and after the
cutting. Before the cutting, we observe by opening the jaw, a row of
dental follicles, corresponding to the row of teeth already formed,
situated below or at the side, and separated from them by little
partitions, the thickness of which is found greater in proportion as it
is examined nearer infancy.

These follicles have precisely the same arrangement as those of the
first dentition; like them they form sacs without an opening, the
alveolar portion of which is attached, and the loose medullary portion
is covered on its surface with the first osseous layers for the crown.
The manner of growth is the same; that is to say, it takes place from
the exterior to the interior, the reverse of the other bones; an
arrangement, which gives the part of the tooth immediately in contact
with foreign bodies, being the first formed, time to acquire the
solidity necessary for its functions.

As the second teeth grow, their vascular system becomes greater, and
that of the old ones diminishes; which arises from this, that the
sensibility weakened in the last, draws to them no more blood, whilst
being raised in the others, it attracts it powerfully. We observe also
that the partition of the sockets diminishes in thickness, and that
the root of the first is destroyed. This double phenomenon does not
appear to be owing to the pressure exerted by the new tooth, as then
the root would spread and become flat only; or if it experienced a
real destruction, we should find the remains of it, which we never do.
It is then probable that, it is by the absorption of the phosphate of
lime, that the partition and root disappear, nearly as we have said the
internal cavities of the cartilaginous bones are formed.

We see from this, that the ossification of the roots of the first teeth
is of short duration; it begins the last and terminates the first.
When it is of but little extent, the teeth become loose, from the want
of insertion. The disappearance of the partitions increases it. It
is at about the age of six or seven years that the shedding of them
commences; this takes place in the order in which they were cut, that
is to say, first the incisors, then the canine, and then the molars.
Observe that the last, which appeared at four years of age, are not
renewed.


_Second Dentition considered at the period of Cutting._

During the cutting of the second teeth, we observe them come out in the
same order as those with which they correspond are detached. 1st. The
eight incisors. 2d. The four canine appear. 3d. In the place of the
first molar, two new ones are cut; these afterwards have the name of
small molars. 4th. The second molar remains, as we have just said; it
is the first of the great ones. 5th. At eight or nine years of age, two
other molars appear in each jaw. 6th. Finally, at eighteen, twenty, or
thirty years, and sometimes later, a third molar is cut; this is called
the dens sapientiæ.

There is then in each jaw sixteen teeth, of which four are incisors,
two canine, two small molars, and three large ones.

Sometimes the second teeth while they are forming, instead of
appropriating to themselves the nutritive substance of the roots of the
first and their partition, leave them untouched; neither are destroyed;
and the second teeth are cut at the side of the first which remain
in their places. When this phenomenon happens, it is usually only to
a single tooth; sometimes, however, it happens to many and even all,
and then there is a double row. In general, the second teeth have a
tendency to go out at the side of the gums. When very obliquely placed,
by a defect of conformation, their crown leans forward or backward;
instead of piercing the jaw, they remain always buried in the sockets.


_Phenomena subsequent to the Cutting of the Second Teeth._

After being cut, the teeth evidently grow, 1st, in length; 2d,
in thickness. It is only the root that is enlarged in the first
direction; the crown preserves always the same dimensions; and if
in old people it appears longer, it is only because the gums have
retracted; a phenomenon which besides we very often observe in persons
who have become thin, in those who have made use of mercury, &c.

The growth in the second direction is not made without, but only
within; the canal of the root and the cavity of the body are constantly
contracting, and are finally obliterated. Then the tooth receiving no
longer the blood or the influence of the nerves, dies and falls out.
But this death appears also to be hastened by the accumulation of
osseous substance, of a very great quantity of the phosphate of lime,
which predominates there so much over the gelatine, that the principle
of life is entirely destroyed, so that in this respect, the shedding of
the teeth exhibits a phenomenon analogous to that of the shedding of
the horns of the herbivorous animals, of the calcareous shell of the
crustaceous ones, &c.

Why has nature given to the life of the teeth a shorter term than to
that of the other bones, which do not cease to exist but with the
other organs, whilst the teeth die a long time before? Is it because
the stomach becoming weak with age, the animals are thence compelled
to nourish themselves in their old age, with soft substances, adapted
to the languid state of the gastric forces? Undoubtedly in man, a
thousand causes, arising especially from the nature of the aliments,
their degree of heat and cold, the manner in which they are cooked,
their infinitely various qualities, hasten the natural period of the
death and the fall of the teeth, because by incessantly exciting
and stimulating these organs, they keep them in a state of constant
activity, which exhausts their life sooner than it otherwise would have
been. Thus a thousand causes arising from society, make the term of the
general life much shorter than that fixed by nature. But in general in
all animals, the death of the teeth precedes that of the other organs,
though they are not under the influence of society, and they masticate
only aliments destined by nature to be in contact with their teeth.

The jaws destitute of teeth in old age, contract; the sockets are
effaced; the texture of the gums becomes firmer, and mastication is
continued, though with more difficulty. In this change of conformation,
the alveolar edge is thrown back; hence the prominence of the chin
before. It diminishes in height; hence the approximation of this part
to the nose, a phenomenon that arises especially from the absence of
the teeth.


V. _Particular Phenomena of the Development of the Sesamoid Bones._

The sesamoid bones exhibit a less marked exception than that of the
teeth, to the general laws of ossification, but one, however, which is
as real.


_General Arrangement of the Sesamoid Bones._

These small bones, commonly of a round form, and of various size, do
not usually exceed that of a pea, except however the patella; they are
in general found only in the extremities; the trunk never has any of
them.

In the superior extremities we hardly see them, except in the hand,
in which the articulation of the thumb with the first bone of the
metacarpus always presents two of them, and in which they are sometimes
found in the analogous articulation of the index finger, rarely in that
of the little one, or in the phalangeal articulation of the thumb.

In the inferior extremities on the contrary, they are numerous and
especially much more evident. Two are seen on each condyle of the
femur, in the tendons of the biceps, behind the knee; in front is the
patella. In the foot, the tendon of the tibialis posticus near its
insertion in the tuberosity of the scaphoid bone, that of the peroneus
longus in its passage under the cuboid, have also sesamoid bones. We
uniformly see two under the metatarso-phalangeal articulations of the
great toe; under most of the analogous articulations of the other toes,
they are also found, though they are more variable. In the phalangeal
articulations I have also seen them many times. In general, the
sesamoid bones exist only in the direction of flexion, which is that
in which the greatest efforts to support are made. In the direction of
extension I know no one but the patella.

These little bones have not, like the others, a separate existence;
they are developed always in a fibrous organ, either in a tendon,
as those of the biceps, the peroneus, the tibialis posticus, as
also the patella; or in a ligament, as all those placed before
the metacarpo-phalangeal articulations, the metatarso-phalangeal
or phalangeal, which have for their basis the great transverse
fibrous fascia, which we have called the anterior ligament of these
articulations.


_Fibro-Cartilaginous State._

The two primitive bases of the sesamoid bones remain for a long
time without exhibiting any rudiments of them, and are at the place
where these bones are to exist as they are everywhere else. Their
organization is generally uniform. Some time after birth, a little
more gelatine than would serve for the nutrition of these two fibrous
bodies begins to be exhaled at the place where the sesamoid bones will
hereafter be found; then arise cartilages, essentially different from
the cartilages of ordinary ossification, which are nearly of the same
nature as those of the extremities of the long bones of adults, whilst
that these belong truly to the class of fibro-cartilaginous substances.
They resemble in their nature the inter-articular fibro-cartilages,
those of the tendinous grooves, &c. These are not cartilages, but
the fibro-cartilages of ossification, of which we distinguish so
much better the fibrous base, as it is nearer the period of their
development that we examine them.


_Osseous State._

Gradually the vessels of these fibro-cartilages, which had only
circulated white fluids, have their sensibility placed in relation with
the blood; this fluid penetrates them; at the same time the phosphate
of lime begins to be deposited in them; then the texture of the cells
is formed in the interior by a mechanism analogous to that of the other
bones; a delicate compact layer is developed on the exterior. But
in the midst of this new bone, the fibrous base always remains; the
fibres of the tendon, above the sesamoid, are continued, if we may so
say, through its substance with those below it; thus the cicatrices of
these bones, when they are fractured, have a peculiar and distinctive
character; it is their fibrous base, which extending itself for their
reunion, produces this difference. We know that the callus of the
patella is not the same as that of the other bones. Often when the
apparatus has not been exactly kept in place, there remains between the
two fragments a fibro-cartilaginous texture as a means of union; now
this texture is the development not only of the cartilaginous portion
of the bone, but also of the portion of the tendon of the extensors,
which makes part of the organization of this bone. The life of the
sesamoid bones partakes almost as much of that of the fibrous as of
that of the osseous system.

As we advance in age, these small bones increase and become more
characterized in the animal economy; oftentimes they are developed very
late, at the age of twenty, thirty, or even forty years. In some old
people they are very large on the foot. I have seen the bodies of two
persons subject to gout, in which they were so developed as probably
to interfere with motion. Was there any connexion between them and this
severe affection? I know only these two facts.

The sesamoid bones elongate their tendons from the centre of motion,
facilitate their sliding upon the bones, defend their articulations and
even contribute to their motions. All those developed in the anterior
ligaments of the metacarpo and metatarso-phalangeal articulations, and
of the phalangeal themselves, contribute also to the motion of these
articulations. A portion of the synovial membrane is spread upon their
face that corresponds with it, and which remains slightly cartilaginous.

The formation of the sesamoid bones is not a mechanical effect of the
pressure of the tendons or the ligaments against the bones, as has been
said, but the result of the laws of ossification. In fact, in the first
supposition, why should all the articulations of the hand and the foot,
other than those pointed out above, being exposed to a motion nearly
equal to the motion of these, be destitute of these bones?




MEDULLARY SYSTEM.


Though the medullary system is only met with in the bones, and
though its principal uses appear to relate entirely to them, yet its
properties and life differ so much from the properties and life of
these organs, that we are compelled to examine them in a separate
manner.

We distinguish two kinds of medullary systems; one occupies the texture
of the cells of the extremities of the long bones, and the whole of the
interior of the short and flat bones; the other is found only in the
middle part of the first; let us examine each separately.


ARTICLE FIRST.

MEDULLARY SYSTEM OF THE FLAT AND SHORT BONES, AND THE EXTREMITIES OF
THE LONG ONES.


I. _Origin and Conformation._

This system appears to be the expansion of the vessels which penetrate
the bones through the foramina of the second order, that is to say,
through those that go to the common texture of the cells. These
vessels having arrived on the internal surface of the cells, divide
ad infinitum and anastomose in a thousand ways. Their interlacing
gives to the interior of the texture of the cells that red appearance
that characterises it, and which is so much the more evident, as it is
examined at an age nearer infancy, because in fact the vascular system
which is very evident at this period, becomes contracted and effaced as
we recede from it.

These are the vessels which, in the section of the bones of the cranium
by the trephine, give to the saw-dust the redness that is observed.
It is these that produce the same phenomenon in the amputation of the
extremity of the limbs. Though in general they remain loaded with blood
at the moment of death, yet we can, as I have often done, accumulate in
them still more by fine injections, which drive before them that which
is found in the vessels, and concentrate it at their extremities; then
the spongy texture of the adult is almost as red as that of the child
which has not been prepared.


II. _Organization._

Authors speak of a delicate membrane that lines the interior of all
the osseous cells, and which they consider to be the exhalant organ of
the medullary fluid. I have never been able, though my researches have
been numerous, to discover a similar membrane. We see only the vascular
elongations of which I have spoken, which, greatly multiplied, appear
in fact to form a membrane, but when examined attentively are found to
be very distinct from each other, not continuous, except at the place
of the anastomoses, and leaving between them many small spaces in which
the bone is not covered, but is in contact with the medullary fluid.

The exhalation then of this fluid appears to arise only from this
vascular net-work, and in this respect it is analogous to that of the
compact substance, which evidently contains no membrane, and the pores
of which are however found filled with this medullary fluid, as is
proved by the combustion of the compact texture and its exposure to the
sun or artificial heat.


III. _Properties._

This vascular net-work has only organic sensibility and insensible
organic contractility, which are necessary for its functions; and it
is this which especially distinguishes it from the medullary system of
the middle part of the long bones, whose animal sensibility is, as we
shall see, very great. Irritate in a living animal the interior of a
short or flat bone, or the extremity of a long one, no sign of animal
sensibility is manifested. Sawing the cranium, the condyles of the
femur and the head of the humerus is not painful.

Injuries of this system when they are very great may produce necrosis
of the bone, and the formation of a new osseous substance at the
expense of the periosteum; but if a small portion only is affected,
this phenomenon does not take place. I have many times perforated
transversely with a gimblet the extremity of a long bone of an animal,
and afterwards passed a red hot iron through the opening; the animal
has always recovered without necrosis; the articulation has only
remained swelled, and much injured in its motions, and some scales have
come from it during the suppuration.


IV. _Development._

The vascular net-work which forms this medullary system, exists in the
cartilaginous state; but then, on the one hand, it does not admit the
red portion of the blood, and on the other, the interstices of its
meshes are found so filled with gelatine, that the cartilage appears
homogeneous. At the period of ossification, the red blood penetrates
on one side of these vessels, whilst on the other they become evident
from the absorption of gelatine at the place of these cells, upon the
internal surface of which they ramify.

In the fœtus and the first age, this medullary system has a remarkable
arrangement. It contains scarcely any of this oily fluid, from which it
borrows its name, and which afterwards fills in so great a proportion
the interstices of the texture of the cells of the different bones;
by examining these organs comparatively in the different ages, I
easily convinced myself of this. 1st. Exposed to a considerable degree
of heat, the texture of the cells of the bones of an adult has an
abundance of oily fluid flow from them. From the same experiment in the
fœtus, there only follows a drying of this texture by the evaporation
of the fluids which enter it. 2d. If we burn the extremity of a long
bone of an adult, the combustion is spontaneously supported by the
oily fluid that escapes from the pores of the second species, and
which keeps up the flame until it is exhausted. In the fœtus, the bone
ceases to burn when we take it from the fire, because the fluids it
contains do not support combustion. 3d. Nothing is more difficult than
to keep the bones of the adult white, because the oil that is in their
interstices always yellows them a little. In the fœtus and the infant,
in whom this cause does not exist, the bones are easily kept white.
4th. By ebullition, we extract scarcely any oil from the texture of
the cells in the first age; much swims on the water in which we have
boiled this texture in the following ages. In general, the, fœtus
appears to want this oil entirely; it is formed after its birth, and
its proportion is constantly increasing until complete growth. What
fluid supplies its place in the first years? At first a large quantity
of blood; for in general the redness of the medullary system is in the
inverse ratio of the oil that is found in it; but the interstices of
the cells appear moreover to be moistened by a fluid with which we are
unacquainted, and which evaporates, as I have said, when we expose to
the fire the bones of a fœtus.


ARTICLE SECOND.

MEDULLARY SYSTEM OF THE MIDDLE OF THE LONG BONES.

This system differs essentially from the preceding in its nature, its
properties, its functions, &c. It occupies the centre of the long
bones, whose great cavity it fills.


I. _Conformation._

Each of the organs from the whole of which it results, exhibits it
under the form of a delicate membrane, lining the whole cavity, folded
a great number of times, giving origin to many elongations, of which
some cover the fine threads of the texture of the cells which are met
with in this cavity, others pass, without adhering to any osseous
portion, from one side of the membrane to the other, and of which all
form numerous cells in which the marrow is contained.

We can then form of this organ an idea analogous to that which the
cellular organ gives us; viz. that of a spongy body with communicating
cells. The place that it occupies, gives to it as a whole, a
cylindrical form.

It appears that at the two extremities of the canal, the cells or
membranes do not open into those of the texture of the cells, and that
the medullary fluid of the preceding system does not communicate with
the marrow of this. In fact, the line of demarcation which separates
them is evident; they do not mix in a gradual manner. Air injected from
one side of the medullary cylinder, only penetrates with difficulty and
by tearing the membrane, into the texture of the cells of the opposite
extremity of the bone; yet, notwithstanding these considerations, I
confess that the question is not fully settled. The transudations
in dead bodies have no influence in deciding it, on account of the
permeability that our parts acquire after death.


II. _Organization._

The texture of the medullary membrane is very little known, because its
extreme tenuity conceals it from our researches; for it is only in the
bones of ricketty subjects, that its morbid increase in thickness has
permitted me to trace it accurately. It has the appearance of cellular
texture; yet its properties and its nature are very different from
this texture; it cannot be referred to any of the three classes of
membranes, the serous, the fibrous or the mucous. Some have pretended
that it was an expansion of the periosteum, which had passed through
the numerous foramina by which the bone is perforated, and entered
into the medullary cavity; but the least parallel made between these
membranes is sufficient to make us see that they are essentially
different in their functions, vital forces, &c. and cannot have the
same texture. A principal vessel penetrates the medullary membrane; it
is the artery, which enters by the only, but very large foramen, which
is seen on the body of the long bones; the two branches of this artery
and those of the corresponding vein, ramify in an opposite direction in
the medullary cylinder, and by their innumerable branches give to it a
very evident reddish colour, that disappears with age. The extremities
borrow their vessels from those of the neighbouring texture of the
cells. We cannot trace any nerve there. Such is sometimes the abundance
of the fluids which penetrate this membrane, and its extreme tenuity,
that it might be said not to exist. To be convinced of its existence,
expose the cylinder that it forms to the intense action of heat; it
contracts, has the horny hardening immediately like all the solids, and
thus becomes more apparent.


III. _Properties._

The properties of texture are very well marked in the medullary organ.
1st. The spina ventosa in which this organ is distended in a very
evident manner with the body of the bone, proves its extensibility. 2d.
The contractility of texture is made apparent by the contraction of
the cells, after the amputation of the middle part of a long bone, a
contraction which prevents the flow of marrow, which without it would
take place on account of the communication of these cells.

It is probable that the insensible organic contractility, which is
then brought into action by the contact of the air upon this membrane
which contracts from its irritation, has an influence also upon this
phenomenon; for this membrane evidently has this kind of contractility,
as well as the corresponding sensibility.

The animal sensibility is developed in it to an extreme degree in
the natural state; the most acute pains are the result of the action
of the saw upon it in amputation, of the introduction of a probe, of
the injection of an irritating fluid into the medullary cavity, or
of any other means which powerfully excite it. I do not speak of the
pains of the bones in spina ventosa, syphilis, &c.; as the membrane is
not then in a natural state, we cannot infer from them what kind of
vital forces it is naturally endowed with. I have observed that the
sensibility is greater, as we approach the centre of the bone with
the probe when pushed into living animals. At the extremity of the
medullary canal this sensibility is small; in the middle, the division
of the bone is very painful. Whence arises this inequality of sensitive
power, this decrease from the centre to the extremities? I know not.
The medullary system evidently does not possess animal contractility
and sensible organic contractility.

It is evident from this view of the vital forces which animate this
system, that the life is much more active in it than in the osseous
system, that its vital phenomena are consequently more rapid, that
they have not that chronic course which characterizes all the diseases
of the bones and that they respond more promptly to the sympathetic
excitements of other organs. I am persuaded that many of the uncertain
pains which we usually refer to the bones in diseases, have their seat
rather in the medullary system, in that of the middle of the long
bones especially; observe in fact that most of these pains are fixed
in the middle of the limbs, and that they are really in the direction
of that system. The medullary system of the extremities of the long
bones, and of the flat and short ones, certainly enjoys much more
vital energy than the osseous texture itself; inflammation is much
more easily developed in it, its effects are more promptly shown. Who
does not know that caries is so much the more rapid, in proportion to
the quantity of the texture of the cells that exists in the bones? It
is not this texture, which by its nature, has an influence upon this
phenomenon; but it is, because the more abundant it is, the more the
medullary system predominates in it; now as this participates in all
its affections, it imprints upon them a rapidity which they have not in
the compact texture in which it does not exist.


IV. _Development._

This membrane exists in the cartilaginous state of the middle part of
the long bones; but then it serves for the nutritive parenchyma to the
gelatine that is exhaled there, and which, accumulated in very great
quantity in its cells, renders the bone homogeneous in appearance,
and prevents it from being distinguished. When ossification takes
place, this substance is absorbed; the medullary cavity is formed; the
medullary membrane is bare; the blood enters its vessels, till then
permeable only by white fluids, because its kind of organic sensibility
changes. Instead of receiving gelatine in its cells, it is the marrow
or another fluid that it admits there, a phenomenon also dependant upon
this change of organic sensibility. Hence an external form wholly new,
a new organ in appearance, whilst in reality it is not the organ which
changes, but the fluid that is deposited in it. The same phenomenon
nearly is observed in the formation of callus, in which the portion
of the medullary membrane corresponding to the fracture is at first
cartilaginous, then osseous, and finally becomes what it was originally.

The exhalation of the marrow does not commence when the blood enters
the medullary canal, or rather it commences, but I have found that
it is wholly different from what it is afterwards in the adult. The
proportion of oily substance is almost nothing in it, compared to what
we have seen in the medullary fluid. 1st. It has a mucilaginous and
reddish appearance; pressed between the fingers, it does not give out
an oil as in the adult, but a fluid like gelatine. 2d. By comparing the
water in which the marrow of the two ages has been boiled, we cannot
see in the first, as in the other, many oily drops floating on the
surface. 3d. Exposed to the action of fire, the middle of a long bone
lets fall an infinite number of small burning drops, very beautiful, of
a blue tinge and which are furnished by the marrow, which burns after
being melted. Nothing similar to this is observed in the fœtus. 4th. We
know that the taste of the marrow is very different in young animals,
in veal, for example, from what it is in adult ones. It is insipid,
disagreeable, little esteemed in the first. 5th. I have observed that
the marrow of children soon putrifies, becomes green, then black, if
their fresh bones have been kept for some time in the air. The odour of
this putrid marrow is very fetid. Preserve, on the contrary, for some
time the bones of an adult, you will observe that their marrow turns
rancid, and becomes of a deep yellow colour, like all fat that has been
some time kept. In general the action of the air is wholly different
upon the medullary organ, in the first and in the after ages. What is
the fluid which this organ especially separates in the fœtus and in
childhood, and which then takes the place of the oily substance? It is
an interesting object of research. Do the vulgar, who connect the idea
of fat with that of marrow, know this phenomenon, when they say that
children have yet no marrow in the bones? This absence of medullary fat
in the fœtus, essentially distinguishes the marrow from the ordinary
fat, which, at this age, is already very abundant.


_Functions._

The first and principal use of the medullary organ is to separate
the marrow from the mass of blood by means of exhalation, for it has
no glands, and afterwards carry it into it again by absorption, when
it has remained for a certain time in its reservoir. This double
phenomenon is very analogous to that which takes place in regard to the
fat, for which we see that there are two orders of vessels distinct
from the sanguineous, that enter its texture; it is not possible
however to demonstrate them anatomically.

Is the activity of the exhalants varied by exercise or rest, heat or
cold, corpulency or emaciation? We have not any precise experiment
upon this subject, though numerous conjectures have been made. But we
know that in phthisis, dropsy and marasmus, and in general, in all
those states of the body in which general debility is carried to an
extreme by the slow and gradual loss of the forces, the marrow, like
the other fluids as well as the solids, is changed, loses its essential
characters, its consistence and takes an appearance wholly different,
without however the medullary membrane experiencing any lesion, or
being thickened. I have never observed this lesion except in rickets.
The appearance of the marrow in these diseases is mucilaginous,
gelatinous, similar to what is seen in the fœtus, with the difference
of the redness, which is produced in the first age, by the great number
of blood vessels.

The medullary membrane has a direct relation with the nutrition of the
bone, a relation which has been proved by the beautiful experiments of
Trojat, from which it follows that the destruction of this membrane
produces the death of the bone, which has necrosis and is replaced
by new bone, for which the periosteum serves for the nutritive
parenchyma. These experiments are usually made by sawing a long bone
at its extremity, and introducing into the medullary cavity a red hot
probe, which destroys the whole organization. Soon after the periosteum
swells, inflames and has an extreme sensibility to the external touch.
This sensibility is gradually lessened; the inflammation disappears.
A considerable quantity of gelatine penetrates the internal layers of
this membrane, which becomes a cartilaginous sac, with which the bone
is covered. At the end of some time, which varies according to the
class of animals subjected to the experiment, according to their age,
their temperament and other causes, the vascular system, destroyed on
the interior of the canal, and expended wholly upon the periosteum,
deposits there the phosphate of lime destined for the bone. To the
cartilaginous cylinder then succeeds the osseous one. The bone within
has no connexion with the life of the living body that surrounds it
on all sides. There are then in artificial ossifications three very
distinct periods, 1st, swelling and inflammation of the periosteum;
2d, cartilaginous state of the internal layers of this membrane; 3d,
osseous state. Besides, these two last states are not as regular and
distinct, nor as easy to be observed as in natural ossification.

Does the medullary membrane serve indirectly to furnish a part of
the synovia by the transudation of the marrow through the extremity
of the long bones? Most authors assert it. We know at the present
day, what must be thought of these mechanical transudations, which
are observed in dead bodies, but which are repugnant to the known
phenomena of vitality; besides, the following experiment leaves no
doubt upon this point. I have opened upon the sides two long bones of
one of the hind legs of a dog, so as to pass in a red hot probe, which
having been carried in several times, completely destroyed the two
medullary systems; necrosis has been pretty soon the consequence of
this experiment, and yet the articulation between the two bones with
necrosis, has continued to receive synovia as usual, a circumstance
that would not have happened, if the transudation of the marrow was
necessary to the production of this fluid. Who does not know, on the
other hand, that in diseases of the articulations in which the synovia
is altered and vitiated, the marrow of the corresponding bones is
almost always in a perfectly sound state, and that vice versa, in the
diseases which attack the medullary organ, the synovia is not altered
in its nature like the fluid which this organ contains in its cells?




CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


The word cartilage is employed too vaguely. It designates, in the
common acceptation, bodies whose organization differ essentially.
The cartilages of the nose and those of the articular surfaces have
certainly but a very remote analogy between them; it is necessary
then to establish a line of demarcation. I have endeavoured to do
it by making two systems of them; one comprehends the cartilages
properly so called, the other, the fibro-cartilaginous substances,
such as those that are between the vertebræ, those in the middle of
some articulations, &c. As this last is a compound of the fibrous and
cartilaginous system, I shall not treat of it until I have spoken of
the fibrous system.

By thus limiting the sense of the word cartilage, it gives us the idea
of a hard, elastic, white substance, having an inorganic appearance,
though it has a real organization. We find this animal substance in
different parts of the body; it is met with especially, 1st, at the
articular extremities of the moveable bones; 2d, on the articular
surfaces of the immoveable bones; 3d, on the parietes of certain
cavities, which it contributes in great measure to form; such are the
cartilages of the nasal partition, of the ribs, the larynx, &c. Hence
three different classes, which exhibit varieties in their forms, in
their organization, &c.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE FORMS OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

The forms of the cartilages vary according to the class to which the
cartilage belongs.


I. _Forms of the Cartilages of the Moveable Articulations._

In every moveable articulation, there is at each osseous extremity,
a cartilage which covers this extremity, which facilitates by its
suppleness the motion of the two bones, the very hard substance of
which would occasion by friction too great a shock; which reflects
by its elasticity a considerable part of the motion, thus made more
extensive; which breaks, by yielding a little, the violence of the
shocks the limbs experience, and which thus render these shocks less
dangerous.

The general character of the internal conformation peculiar to these
cartilages is that of being always less thick than broad, of having
a thickness which is in the ratio of their breadth: so that the
cartilages of the great articulations exceed in this respect two,
three, or four times even, those of the smaller articulations; and
these cartilages are moulded upon the articular forms and exhibit two
faces and a circumference.

One of these faces adheres to the bone; it unites with it so
intimately, that fractures take place any where else rather than
here. The means of union are not exactly known; this is certain,
that the cartilage is not an elongation, a continuation of the
cartilaginous parenchyma of the bone; the fibres of this parenchyma
are not continuous with those of the cartilages. If it really
was so, by removing from a long bone, fresh and clothed with its
cartilage, the phosphate of lime which penetrates it, we should see
this continuity, the bone and the cartilage would not differ; now I
have constantly observed that in this experiment the action of the
acid detaches the cartilage from the bone, either in fragments or
as a whole. We see the cartilaginous fibres of the bone deprived of
its saline base, terminating evidently on the convex surface which
the cartilage embraces; no solution of continuity has taken place.
In general, the appearance of the cartilaginous parenchyma, separate
from its calcareous portion, is wholly different from that of a true
cartilage., I presume that this difference is owing to the quantity of
gelatine, which is greater in the second than in the first. The action
of the acids, especially the nitric, is the best means of separating
a cartilage from its osseous head; maceration does not produce this
phenomenon under a great length of time; in ebullition, as the gelatine
melts, it is less apparent.

The surface of the cartilage opposite to the bone, is intimately united
to the synovial membrane of the articulation. It borrows from it the
polish which it has; for wherever these substances do not correspond
to this membrane, they lose this character, as we see in the larynx,
in the cartilages of the ribs, &c. Here the means of adhesion is an
extremely compact cellular texture, which neither maceration nor
dissection can remove in layers. As the synovial membrane is wholly
formed from this texture, it appears that upon the cartilage it is
only an elongation of that which, after having contributed to the
structure of this organ, is condensed upon its surface and organized as
a membrane.

The circumference of the cartilages of which we are treating,
terminates insensibly upon the osseous surface; it ceases at the place,
where the synovial membrane quits the bone to be reflected.

The two corresponding cartilages of a moveable articulation are so
arranged and adapted to each other, that in the medium position of
the articulation, they touch exactly at all their points; now we know
that the medium position of an articulation is that in which the bone
inclines in neither direction, in which all the muscles contracting
uniformly and making an equal resistance, keep it equally from
extension and flexion, from adduction and abduction, &c. &c. and hold
it in the exact medium. It is this position which the limbs take, when
the will does not direct the muscular effort, as for example, in the
fœtus, in sleep, in rest, &c.; this is what some convulsions produce,
in which all the muscles of a limb are agitated with an equal effort,
by an extraordinary influx of the nervous power, &c. In no other
position does the contact of the two articular cartilages take place at
all their points; one portion of the surface of each always pushes with
more or less force the parts surrounding the articulation, and distends
them. The softness of the cartilaginous texture renders less painful
this pressure, which would be distressing in the great motions, if the
bones preserved their hardness at the extremity of the lever which they
represent.

The cartilaginous forms of which we are treating, besides these common
characters, have others peculiar to each kind of moveable articulations.

1st. In the first kind, the convex crust which covers the osseous head,
is thick in the centre, but not at the circumference. An opposite
arrangement takes place in the concave crust which receives this head;
often even as in the humerus, and the femur, the thickness of this
crust is increased at its circumference by a fibro-cartilaginous band.
In this way, the effort is borne unequally by the two cartilages; but
the uniformity of contact is established.

2d. In the second kind, which differs from the first by the absence
of the motion of rotation, though in general a convexity is also
received into a concavity, the arrangement for both the cartilages is
nearly the same. Yet if two convex surfaces slide upon each other, an
example of which we have in the condyle of the jaw and the transverse
apophysis, then the cartilage is constantly becoming thinner towards
the circumference of each; but then an inter-articular cartilage, thick
at the circumference, thin in the middle, supplies the place of this
arrangement, and establishes at all points a contact, which, without
it, would only take place at the centre.

3d. In the third kind, the cartilaginous crust which covers the
prominences and depressions, which reciprocally receive each other upon
the extremities of the two bones, exhibits nearly an uniform thickness,
as we see at the elbow, the knee, &c.; so that the pressure comes
equally upon the whole articular surface.

4th. In the fourth and fifth kinds, the cartilaginous crusts moulded
on the form of the osseous surfaces, have also a thickness nearly
uniform at all points; I have found upon the bones of an adult, that
this thickness is a line and a half in the radio-cubital articulation
and that of the atlas, and a line in the carpal and metacarpal
articulations.


II. _Forms of the Cartilages of the Immoveable Articulations._

The cartilages are found only in two kinds of immoveable articulations,
viz. in those with surfaces in juxta-position and those with indented
surfaces. They form in all a very thin layer, continued upon both bones
which articulate together, arising from their osseous portion, like
those described before, being of the same nature as it, and forming a
band so much the more close as we advance in age.

On the head these cartilages are very numerous; those of the cranium
have more thickness on the convex than on the concave side, hence the
more rapid disappearance of sutures in the last than in the first
direction.

Wherever they are found, they contribute to unite the bones which form
the cavities; hence, as we have said, there is less danger for these
from external bodies, since the motion lost then in part in their soft
texture, produces a less effect than if the cavity was only one osseous
piece.

It appears that these cartilages have much more affinity to the
phosphate of lime, than those of the moveable articulations, which
rarely ossify, whilst at an advanced age these always become osseous,
of which the cranium especially furnishes us examples. I would observe
however that the cartilages of the indented surfaces have much more
tendency to ossification than those of the surfaces in juxta-position.
At least it is more common to see the parietal bones united with the
occipital and frontal, than to see the union of the ossa maxillaria,
ossa palati, &c.


III. _Forms of the Cartilages of the Cavities._

The cartilages of the cavities have two different forms according to
the parts which they contribute to form. They are, 1st, long, as in the
ribs; 2d, flat, as in the larynx, the nasal partition, &c.

All are covered on the exterior with a fibrous membrane like the
periosteum, and in which different muscles are inserted. In order to
see this membrane it is necessary to macerate the cartilage for a day
or two; it then becomes white and very evident in its thickness, and
the direction of its fibres. The cartilages of the cavities do not
exhibit the numerous foramina which are seen in the bones, because the
blood vessels do not penetrate them. But few eminences and depressions
are observed in them. We can hardly consider their forms in a general
manner, because destined to very different uses, they have but little
resemblance in their conformation.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

In examining a cartilage in its interior, it is difficult to recognize
in it an organic texture; there is one however, which is composed of a
peculiar texture and of common textures.


I. _Texture peculiar to the Cartilaginous System._

The peculiar cartilaginous texture exhibits an interlacing of fibres so
compact, that it appears at first view homogeneous, formed into a mass
of gelatine, without order and without any particular direction. Yet
with a little attention we distinguish longitudinal fibres, which are
crossed by transverse and oblique ones.

These fibres are more apparent in the cartilages of the moveable
osseous extremities than in the others. They have infinitely less
suppleness than the fibres of the fibro-cartilaginous substances; thus
these bend without breaking, whilst the first break when they are
bent considerably; the place of the rupture is smooth, with but few
inequalities.

The cartilaginous texture is remarkable for many characters which
distinguish it from the others. Next to the osseous texture, no one so
long resists putrefaction and maceration. In the midst of a dead body
wholly putrid, we find this texture almost untouched, preserving its
appearance, its structure, and even oftentimes its natural whiteness.
The same thing is frequently seen in gangrenous limbs in the living
body. I have kept cartilaginous substances a very long time in water,
which have not become altered, except a little in their colour. It
would require more than a year perhaps, to reduce them to that soft,
mucous, liquid pulp, to which maceration reduces most of the organs.

The cartilaginous texture contracts under the very powerful action
of caloric, like all the other textures; yet this phenomenon is not
apparent in the thyroid cartilage on account of its thickness, nor in
the cartilages that encrust the bones, on account of their adhesion
to these bones. But if we cut one in fine layers, and the others in
slices, and plunge them into boiling water, they crisp up immediately
and with force.

Exposed to drying, the cartilaginous texture becomes yellow, acquires
a semi-transparency analogous to that of the tendons and dried
ligaments; it becomes hard, contracts, diminishes in size, and loses
its elasticity as it becomes hard.

Ebullition also gives it at first a yellow colour, then it cracks it
upon the articular extremities, breaks it in different places, and
raises it by layers which it softens, and which finally it melts almost
completely to a small residue, which does not appear to be gelatinous.
The softening of the cartilaginous texture renders it much more fit to
be dissolved by the digestive juices than it naturally is. Swallowed
raw, the cartilages would remain a long time in the stomach, whilst
they are very easily digested when cooked; this is one of the very
great advantages of the boiling of meat. In different experiments made
upon digestion, I have found portions of cartilages still untouched in
the stomach of dogs, whilst the flesh was already reduced to a pulp.

In certain cases, the cartilaginous texture is singularly altered.
In the diseases of the articulation of the hip, it assumes an aspect
wholly different; it is a soft substance, like lard, with very distinct
vessels, sometimes with very evident fibres, having a size double,
quadruple what is natural, and filling the cotyloid cavity. I have
observed that then they do not become yellow, do not melt by ebullition
and consequently are not gelatinous. In the same diseases, I have
found the cartilaginous texture, upon the femur and the ilium, not
only ossified, but changed into a substance exactly like ivory; I have
preserved these two pieces.

When the cartilages become osseous, there is developed in their middle
a texture analogous to that of the texture of the cells of the bones,
in which the interlaced fibres leave between them very distinct spaces,
and in which is deposited a kind of medullary fluid. This observation
is especially applicable to those of the cavities, of the larynx, of
the thorax, &c.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Cartilaginous System._

There is cellular texture in the cartilages, though the want of
interstices between their fibres, renders it very difficult to
distinguish it in a natural state; in fact the development of fleshy
granulations in wounds in which they are concerned, ebullition which,
after having removed the gelatine, leaves a membranous and cellular
residue, prove abundantly the existence of this texture, which we see
besides in a very evident manner in some morbid states, in which the
gelatine less copiously deposited in the cartilages, ceases to give
them their usual hardness and leaves there a soft texture, often like
sponge.

We do not discover any blood vessels in the cartilages. The exhalant
system circulates only white fluids in them; but as this system is
continuous with the arteries of the neighbouring parts, when the
organic sensibility is raised in it by morbid irritations, and it thus
becomes in relation with the red globules of the blood, these globules
easily pass into it, and hence the redness the cartilages then have, as
we see in their inflammation, in wounds of them, &c. It is this same
phenomenon that we observe upon an inflamed conjunctiva, &c. When the
irritating cause has ceased, the sensibility resumes its natural type,
the red globules then become heterogeneous to the cartilage, which
again becomes white.

We are ignorant of the nature of the white fluids which usually
circulate in the vascular system of the cartilages. These fluids very
easily become the vehicle of the bile, or at least of its colouring
matter, which is spread through the animal economy in jaundice. We
observe almost uniformly, that in this disease the cartilages are of
a yellow colour, like all the other parts; the colour is more evident
on their surface than in their texture, though it exists there. By
opening a moveable articulation, the bilious appearance is commonly
found as great there as upon the skin. Besides, all the parts, which
like them, receive but few or no red globules in the ordinary state,
are also found very evidently coloured. The tendons, the conjunctiva,
the internal membrane of the arteries, &c. are examples of this. I have
remarked in two subjects whose thyroid cartilages were ossified in the
middle, that the yellow colour was much brighter in the osseous than
in the cartilaginous portion. I do not know that nerves have ever been
traced in the cartilages.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


I. _Physical Properties._

Elasticity is a property generally extended to all organic and
inorganic bodies. Among the first, it appears, that vegetables are
endowed with it in the greater number of their organs; that animals,
almost all of whose parts are soft, have some which return to their
original state after having been stretched or compressed. Among these,
the cartilages hold one of the first ranks in man. Their elasticity
is very great, especially in the adult age, when their consistence
is between the softness, which characterizes them in childhood, and
the hardness, which is their attendant in old age. These two last
properties are in fact not favourable to the elastic power.

If we plunge a scalpel into a cartilage, the edges of the divided place
re-act upon it and expel it. Pressed against a resisting body, the
cartilaginous extremity of a long bone becomes flat and resumes its
form when the compression ceases. The edges of the thyroid cartilage,
when it is cut longitudinally in the operation of bronchotomy,
immediately approximate each other. The division of the cricoid ring
exhibits the same phenomenon. The cartilages of the last ribs, when
forced in towards the abdomen, come out of themselves, &c. &c. All
these phenomena are the evident result of an elastic power. Thus nature
has placed the cartilages wherever, to produce her phenomena, there
is a necessity of uniting a physical to the vital forces, as in the
larynx, in the nasal septum, in order to produce a sort of vibration
in the passage of the air, at the extremity of the ribs, in order to
be the seat of a species of twisting necessary to the mechanical part
of respiration, at the articular extremities, in order to diminish the
force of blows, &c.

It appears that the vital activity renders this property greater,
which however remains very apparent after death. I presume that this
is owing to the great quantity of gelatine they contain. 1st. We know
that this substance possesses it in a very high degree, as is proved
by the tremulous motion of jelly after it has become cold, by the
examination of various animal glues, &c. 2d. If by ebullition we remove
this substance from the cartilages, the nutritive parenchyma remains
flaccid and soft. 3d. As the gelatine diminishes in our organs, the
elasticity in them is less, as we see by examining the decrease of
this property from the cartilages in which it predominates, to the
fibro-cartilaginous organs in which it is in a smaller proportion, and
to the fibrous bodies in which it is still less. It must be confessed
however that many very gelatinous bodies, exhibit but very slight
traces of elasticity; the skin is an example of this, and so are the
tendons. Can the same substance, as it is differently operated upon by
the organic laws, become the seat of properties wholly dissimilar?


II. _Properties of Texture._

The cartilages are perhaps of all the organs, those in which the
extensibility and contractility of texture are the least developed. We
see them rarely distended and elongated; they break first. Diseases
do not exhibit in the larynx those dilations so common in the other
cavities, even the osseous ones. When divided, the edges, far from
separating as in the skin, in a muscle, &c. approximate each other, as
we have seen, by the effect of elasticity; we might say that this last
property was accumulated in the cartilages at the expense of those of
texture.


III. _Vital Properties._

The vital properties are also very obscure in them. There is no animal
sensibility in the natural state; it is only when inflammation or some
other cause raises their organic sensibility, a sensibility which their
functions necessarily suppose, it is only then, I say, that the brain
perceives painfully the different irritations of which these organs
are the seat. This becomes manifest, especially when foreign bodies
are formed in the articulations, which suffer from their presence or
are insensible to them, according as they irritate or not by their
position, the cartilaginous extremities. There is neither animal nor
sensible organic contractility in the cartilages; the insensible
organic or tone alone exists in them, and this not in a great degree.

The sympathies are obscure, almost wanting in the cartilaginous system.
I do not know that in the acute affections of the different organs,
we observe sympathetic phenomena of sensibility or contractility in
them. They remain tranquil in the midst of the general derangement
which affects the other systems in this sort of diseases. In chronic
affections even, they experience but little alteration; examine, for
example, comparatively, the body of a man that has died a violent
death, which has left his organs untouched, and that of one who has
died from phthisis, dropsy, cancer, &c. you will perceive between
almost all their organs a striking difference; the aspect of the
muscles, of the mucous and serous surfaces, of the vessels, the nerves,
&c. is entirely changed by the slow alteration they have undergone
in the second; in the midst of these alterations the cartilages are
unchanged, their appearance is almost the same as in a natural state.


_Character of the Vital Properties._

From what has been said, it is evident that the cartilaginous life
can have but little activity, that all the morbid phenomena must
be characterized in these organs by a peculiar slowness, and that
inflammation, for example, must always have in the cartilages, as in
the bones, a chronic progress; this is rendered very clear by the
following experiment. Lay bare a cartilage, divide it, and afterwards
bring it in contact with a portion of a muscle, the skin, &c. also
divided at their surface; the reunion does not take place, or at
least not until a very long time. Why? because the life of the muscle
or the skin being much more active than that of the cartilages, the
inflammation of the first organs will be much more rapid than that
of the second, and consequently the first inflammatory period of one
will correspond to the last of the others. Now the reunion is so much
the easier as the inflammatory periods correspond the more exactly
in the two divided parts that are in contact. Hence why two parts of
the same organ unite much more easily than two surfaces belonging to
different organs. Hence why the greater the analogy in the lives of
the two organs, the greater the facility with which they unite; why
the difficulties increase as the differences of life become greater.
Two osseous surfaces in contact require thirty or forty days to unite;
the two edges of a cutaneous wound unite in two or three days. If you
attempt to render continuous two organs thus unlike in their mode
of cicatrization, by putting them in contact, you will succeed but
slowly. Cover with skin the osseous extremity of an amputated stump;
this will be in a state of suppuration, before the bone has hardly
begun to soften; thus good practitioners have abandoned these pretended
unions by the first intention, so much boasted of, after amputation
by the flap operation. These unions would no doubt take place, if the
life of the organs which enter into the composition of the flap was the
same. But with the diversity of these muscular, osseous, tendinous,
cellular, nervous organs, &c. it requires a long time for all their
lives to be placed as it were in equilibrium, and for these organs to
agglutinate at their divided extremities. I have already observed that
the division of inflammations into acute and chronic gives physicians
an inexact idea; for the duration of the inflammatory phenomena in the
organs is wholly relative to their degree of life. An inflammation
of the cellular texture and of the skin is acute, when it lasts but
a few days; it is chronic when it continues forty or fifty days; in
a cartilage, this last period may be that of an acute inflammation,
whilst a duration of many months is necessary to make it chronic, as
the diseases of the joints exhibit frequent examples.

The natural functions, as well as the morbid affections, have this
slowness of the vital phenomena of the cartilages. The constant
composition and decomposition, which their nutrition supposes, is not
rapid. It requires a long time for nutritive substances to combine
with them. I am persuaded that in animals which die suddenly from the
effects of a carbuncle and whose muscles, glands, membranes, &c. almost
instantly penetrated with the deleterious principles by the nutritive
motion of composition, present an aliment so injurious, I am persuaded,
I say, that these injurious principles not yet having penetrated the
cartilages, these might be digested without danger. It is to the
slowness of the motion of decomposition that must be attributed the
slowness of the resolution of cartilaginous swellings; for tumours are
resolved by the same laws that decompose our organs, as they are formed
by the same laws that preside over their composition.

The cartilages and the analogous organs, are to the other parts of the
economy, as it respects their vitality, what the zoophytes and other
animals with a capillary circulation only, are to the animals better
organized, to those with a general circulation and those that have a
heart with a double ventricle. As much as life considered in general
in the series of beings that it animates, presents a difference in
its activity, so much it differs in the same respect, examined in
particular in the organs of each of these beings.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

The osseous and cartilaginous systems are confounded in the embryo; as
the first is developed, the second contracts; the latter very evidently
has gelatine for its principal base; I shall not return to the proofs
that have demonstrated it in the osseous system.

I have shown, in speaking of that system, how the cellular and vascular
parenchyma, existing at first alone and constituting the mucous state,
is penetrated afterwards with this base, which forms the cartilage. The
primitive mode of the formation of these organs is then already known.
Let us see how its development continues.


I. _State of the Cartilaginous System in the first age._

As ossification advances in the bones and gelatine is consequently
carried to them in less quantity, it seems that it goes more abundantly
to the articular surfaces; for the cartilages that are met with,
then lose their primitive softness, and have a consistence that is
constantly increasing. Yet much more gelatine leaves the bones, than
is carried to the cartilages; so that we may say that this substance
is continually diminishing, in the organs, in proportion as we advance
in age. We know that it is the parts of young animals particularly,
that are selected to make glue, jelly, &c. The articular cartilages
at this period exhibit a phenomenon that I have frequently noticed in
my experiments; when we macerate them in water for two or three days,
they take a very evident red colour. This colour does not penetrate
deeply; but if we cut the cartilage in many places so as to bring the
fluid in contact with its interior, the whole of it becomes red. The
cartilages of ossification exhibit the same phenomenon, which becomes
less conspicuous as we advance in age; so that in adults generally,
the cartilages do not lose their white colour by maceration. In some
however they take a reddish tinge which is infinitely less bright than
in the fœtus. Whence arises this phenomenon? Does the water give to the
cartilage the cause of its colour, or does it take from it by solution
certain substances which prevented this colour from being developed?
Whatever may be the cause, none of the organs of articulation redden in
this way; all on the contrary, the synovial, the ligaments, &c. become
whiter.

There is usually no sensible demarcation between the cartilage that is
to become bone, and that which is to remain as it is; sometimes however
on the one hand we observe it a more dull colour at the extremity of
the bones, whilst on the other, we never discover the reddish streaks,
which are so frequently seen irregularly scattered on the cartilages of
ossification.

As long as ossification continues, there is between the cartilage and
the osseous portion already formed, a very evident vascular layer, and
it is extremely easy to separate these two portions, which adhere but
slightly to each other. We observe also on the surface of each when
they are separated, several inequalities, projections and depressions
reciprocally adapted to each other. It is the want of adhesion of the
cartilaginous and osseous portions, before complete ossification,
which has no doubt given rise to all that has been written upon the
separation of the epiphyses, a separation which the observations of
modern surgeons have rarely confirmed.

As the calcareous substance arrives at the extremities of the bone, the
vessels gradually disappear, and the adhesions increase. Finally, the
ossification being finished, there is no longer, on the one hand, an
evident vascular net-work between the cartilage and the bone; and on
the other, their union is such, that all rupture between them is almost
impossible. These two characters especially distinguish the relation
of the cartilage of ossification with the bone, from that of the real
cartilage with the same bone. I have observed also that almost always
above its union with the osseous portion, the cartilage of ossification
has less whiteness, a deeper tinge, which extends the distance of two
or three lines, and whose difference is often very considerable; this
is the forerunner of the access of the blood. This arrangement does not
exist in the cartilage of the bones of the adult.

We attribute commonly to the articular motions, the want of
ossification of the cartilages of the moveable articulations; but I
believe that it depends wholly upon the laws of osseous nutrition.
Nature limits there the exhalation of the phosphate of lime, as it
limits at the origin of a tendon the exhalation of the fibrin of the
muscle which corresponds to it; it is because the mode of organic
sensibility changes and the vessels of the cartilages are no longer
in relation with the red part of the blood nor with the calcareous
substance. In fact, by supposing the preceding hypothesis true, why do
the cartilages of the immoveable articulations exist? Why should the
motion which elsewhere favours exhalations and secretions, prevent here
the first of these? Why do preternatural ossifications take place in
the most moveable parts, of which the arteries furnish us an example?
Why, in many anchyloses in which the articular surfaces unite, and in
which the motion is destroyed, do not the cartilages disappear?

The cartilages of the cavities have a mode of origin, development and
nutrition, perfectly analogous to that of the articular cartilages.
I would observe that their texture differs, as well as the texture
of these, from that of the cartilages of ossification, in this, that
these last are crossed by many grey lines, and the others are not.
When we cut the cartilages of ossification in any direction whatever,
their divided surfaces exhibit numerous small points which are the cut
extremities of these lines, which appear to be vessels, that, without
yet circulating blood, contain a fluid of a deeper colour than that of
the cartilaginous texture.


II. _State of the Cartilaginous System in the after ages._

As we advance in age, the cartilages become harder, stronger, and less
elastic. The gelatine that nourishes them has a peculiar character;
for we know that the glue made from young animals differs essentially
from that made from old ones. The cooks know very well the difference
there is between the foot of a calf and that of an ox for jelly. This
difference in the substance which essentially composes the cartilages,
and which is undoubtedly their nutritive matter, evidently indicates
that it does not always remain in these organs, but that it is
constantly exhaled and absorbed there, as the phosphate of lime is in
the bones, the fibrin in the muscles, &c.

In the last years of life, ossification seizes upon all the cartilages;
but it begins in an opposite manner in those of the cavities and in
those of the articulations. In the first it is by the centre, in the
second it is by their surface which corresponds to the bone, that it
commences; in general it is much slower in the latter, and among these,
it is slower in the moveable articulations than in the immoveable.

The cartilages of the larynx and the ribs are osseous in their centre
at the age of thirty-six or forty years, and even before; they
afterwards become more and more so; it is this that renders the section
of the thyroid cartilage very difficult in the last periods of life.

In the great number of operations that I have shown to students,
I have satisfied myself, that after sixty years, the bistoury of
ordinary temper is almost always insufficient to make this section;
it requires something much stronger. It is the ossification of the
costal cartilages, which renders old people unable to make those great
efforts of inspiration so common to young ones; with them the diaphragm
especially acts. I attribute also to this early ossification of the
cartilages of the cavities, an ossification which always accompanies
the development of the vascular system, the greater frequency of caries
in this sort of cartilages than in all the others. I know not why
in the larynx the arytenoid cartilages are the most exposed to this
affection; but in the opening of dead bodies, it is a constant fact,
all the cases of laryngeal phthisis with caries, that I have observed
in the dead body, have shown me this.


III. _Preternatural Development of the Cartilaginous System._

The cartilaginous system, like the osseous, is often developed
in organs to which it is naturally a stranger. But there is this
difference, that this phenomenon appears to be an effect of age
in the first, whereas in the second it is always the effect of
disease. Nothing is more common than to find cartilaginous balls in
scirrhous, cancerous tumours, &c.; in the middle of those frequent
morbid productions, in which the parts have an appearance like
lard, in the lungs, liver, &c. when enlarged. I do not know why the
peculiar membrane of the spleen has a great tendency to be encrusted
with gelatine; it is perhaps of all the organs, that in which the
preternatural cartilages are the most frequent. It is usually by
irregular scales that the cartilaginous development appears; sometimes
it attacks the whole membrane, which then presents a convex surface
analogous to the convex surfaces of the moveable articulations, which
the peritoneum covers, as these are covered by the synovial membrane.
Can the spleen, when thus cartilaginous externally, yield to the
changes of size that it often undergoes? I know not.

We know that there are often moveable and loose cartilaginous
substances in the articulations. Do they arise from the ossification
of a portion of the synovial membrane? I presume they do; for we
frequently see them hold to the cartilage by membranous expansions. I
have seen in a dead body, within the last year, the portion of synovial
membrane that goes from the fatty substance behind the patella, to the
depression that separates the condyles of the femur, almost wholly
cartilaginous. If during life it had been detached by the effect of
the motions, it would have formed one of these moveable and loose
cartilages. Besides, as I know but this fact which seems peculiarly
applicable to this point, I can only offer conjectures, especially as
we know that the synovial and serous membranes are of the same nature,
and yet these last hardly ever become cartilaginous.

Moreover these productions follow entirely the ordinary progress
of ossification. At first cartilaginous and without blood vessels,
they soon acquire a red centre, then osseous, which extends from
the centre to the circumference, and which sometimes terminates by
seizing upon the whole cartilage; so that they are real bones. This
last circumstance is however very rare. The state in which we most
commonly find these productions, is that in which they are osseous in
the middle, and cartilaginous at the circumference. I found one of them
in the articulation of the pisiform bone, of the size of the head of a
great pin, and which, in its whole thickness was harder than ivory.




FIBROUS SYSTEM.


The fibrous organs have not been considered by anatomists in a general
manner; no one has yet made a system of them. Separately described with
the parts in which they are found, they cannot, in the present state of
science, present us any of those great views, so useful to the practice
of medicine, which show us each organic apparatus resulting from the
combination of different systems, to which analogous ones are found
in the other apparatus; so that though very different as it respects
their functions, these apparatus are yet subject to the same diseases,
because similar systems enter into their structure.

I presented, two years since, various general views upon the fibrous
membranes, which have opened the way; but these membranes are only a
division of the fibrous system, which must be considered here more at
length.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE FORMS AND DIVISIONS OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.

Though all the fibrous organs have precisely the same nature, and
though the same fibre enters into the composition of all, yet the
forms which they assume are extremely various; it is this variety of
form, joined to that of their position and their functions, which has
given them a different denomination, and made us designate them by the
name of tendons, aponeuroses, ligaments, &c.; for there is no general
denomination for the whole system, no word which answers for example
to that of muscle, nerve, &c. which in the muscular, nervous systems,
&c. gives an idea of the organization, whatever may be the form of the
organ. I shall not create a word, I shall be easily understood without
it.

All the fibrous forms can be referred to two general ones; one of these
is membranous, the other in fasciæ. The organ is broad and thin in the
first; it is longer and thicker in the second. Thus the muscles, the
nerves, the bones themselves exhibit alternately this arrangement in
their conformation, as we see in the retina compared with the round
nerves, in the muscular layers of the stomach and the intestines,
compared with the muscles of locomotion, and in the bones of the
cranium compared with those of the extremities.


I. _Of the Fibrous Organs of a Membranous Form._

The fibrous organs arranged as membranes are, 1st, the fibrous
membranes, properly so called; 2d, the fibrous capsules; 3d, the
tendinous sheaths; 4th, the aponeuroses.

1st. The fibrous membranes comprehend the periosteum, the dura-mater,
the sclerotica, the albuginea, the peculiar membranes of the kidney,
the spleen, &c. &c. They are in general destined to form the covering
of certain organs, into the structure of which they enter.

2d. The fibrous capsules, very distinct, as we shall see, from the
synovial surfaces, are a kind of cylindrical sacs, which are found
around certain articulations, especially those of the humerus and
the femur, whose connexions with the scapula and the ilium they
strengthen, by embracing with their two extremities, both surfaces of
the articulation.

3d. The fibrous sheaths are destined to confine the tendons in their
passage upon the bones, where they are reflected, and generally
wherever by muscular contraction they would be made to deviate and
consequently transmit with difficulty to the bones the motion they
receive from the muscles. They may be divided into two kinds; one
receives and transmits the tendons of many muscles united, as is seen
at the wrist, the instep, &c.; the other, like that of the fingers, is
destined for a single tendon, or two only.

4th. The aponeuroses are a kind of fibrous nets more or less broad,
entering always into the system of locomotion, and so arranged that
they sometimes form coverings for different parts, and sometimes
furnish the muscles with points of insertion. Hence the aponeuroses of
covering and the aponeuroses of insertion; each of them is divided into
species.

The aponeuroses of covering are placed sometimes around a muscle, to
which they serve as a general sheath, as we see on the thigh, the
fore-arm, &c.; sometimes upon certain muscles which they partially
retain in their respective places, as that which goes from the
posterior and superior serratus minor to the anterior and inferior, as
the abdominal aponeurosis, as that situated anteriorly to the solæus,
behind the deep muscles of the leg, &c.

The aponeuroses of insertion are sometimes with surfaces more or less
broad, as in the attachments of the triceps femoris, the rectus, the
biceps, &c.; sometimes with fibres separate from each other, and
giving attachment by each of these fibres to a fleshy fibre, as at
the superior insertion of the iliacus, of the anterior tibialis, &c.;
sometimes finally in the form of an arch, and then at the same time
that they give the muscles points of insertion, they allow vessels to
pass under them, as in the diaphragm, the solæus, &c.


II. _Of the Fibrous Organs in the form of Fasciæ._

The fibrous organs arranged in fasciæ are, 1st, the tendons; 2d, the
ligaments.

1st. The tendons are found at the origin, insertion or middle of the
muscles. They are either simple, in the form of elongated cords, as in
the peronæus, the tibialis, and almost all the muscles, or compound, as
in the rectus, the flexors, &c.

2d. The ligaments strengthen the osseous or cartilaginous
articulations, around which they are found. They have regular fasciæ,
as the lateral ligaments of the elbow, the knee, the jaw, &c.; or
irregular fasciæ, as those of the pelvis.


III. _Table of the Fibrous System._

We can in the following table present at a single view the
classification of the fibrous organs that I have just pointed out.

          ┌                ┌Fibrous Membranes.
          │                │Fibrous Capsules.
          │                │                  ┌Partial.
          │Of a membranous │Fibrous Sheaths.  └General.
          │   form.        │                          ┌Partial.
          │                │            ┌For covering └General.
  FIBROUS │                │Aponeuroses │
  ORGANS. │                │            │            ┌With a broad surface.
          │                └            └Of Insertion│In an arch.
          │                                          └With separate fibres.
          │
          │                ┌Tendons     ┌Simple.
          │In the form     │            └Compound.
          │  of fasciæ.    └Ligaments   ┌With regular fasciæ.
          └                             └With irregular fasciæ.

Though the numerous organs which enter into this classification, belong
to very different apparatus, though they seem to be spread here and
there in the economy, without holding together at all, and though all
appear insulated, yet they are almost all continuous and connected; so
that we may consider the fibrous system, like the vascular and cerebral
nervous systems, that is to say, as having a common centre, from which
all the different organs go that form its divisions.

This common centre of the fibrous system appears to me to be the
periosteum, not that I pretend that like the heart or the brain, it
sends out radiations upon the organs that go from it, but because
anatomical inspection shows us that all the fibrous organs are
intimately connected with it, and by its means communicate with each
other; the following observations are a proof of this.

1st. Among the fibrous membranes, that of the corpus cavernosum
intermixes with the periosteum below the ischium; the dura-mater is
continued with it through the foramina at the base of the brain;
by uniting itself by the lamina which accompanies the optic nerve
to the sclerotica, it joins to it this membrane, and thus serves
as an intermediate organ for them. 2d. All the fibrous capsules
above and below the articulation intermix with the periosteum. 3d.
Wherever fibrous sheaths exist their fibres intermix with those
of the periosteum. 4th. All the aponeuroses either of covering or
insertion have a similar intermixing. 5th. Wherever the tendons are
expanded, they are also confounded with this membrane. 6th. At the
two extremities of the ligaments it unites also its fibres to theirs.
There are none scarcely except the albuginea, the perichondrium of
the larynx, the membranes of the spleen and the kidney, that form an
exception to this general rule.

The fibrous system should be considered then in a general manner, that
is to say, as extending itself everywhere, belonging at the same time
to many organic apparatus, distinct in each by its form, but continuous
in the greatest number, having everywhere communications. This manner
of describing it will appear still more natural, if we consider that
the periosteum, the general boundary of the different portions of this
system, is itself everywhere continuous, and at the place where the
articulations divide it, the fibrous capsules and the ligaments serve,
as we have said, to reunite it.

We understand from this use of the periosteum in relation to the
fibrous system, what the advantage is of its situation upon the bones
which offer it a solid support, and give the same also to the organs of
which it is the boundary.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.

In the midst of the varieties of form that we have just examined, the
general organization of the fibrous organs is always nearly the same.
I shall now consider this organization; I shall treat elsewhere of the
varieties it experiences in each part. It arises from the union of a
peculiar texture and of the vascular, cellular systems, &c.


I. _Of the Texture peculiar to the Organization of the Fibrous System._

Every fibrous organ has for a base a fibre of a peculiar nature;
hard, but slightly elastic, insensible, scarcely at all contractile,
sometimes in juxta-position and parallel to each other, as in the
tendons and the ligaments, sometimes crossed in various directions, as
in the membranes, the capsules, the fibrous sheaths, &c. but everywhere
the same, everywhere of a white or greyish colour, and of a remarkable
resistance.

This resistance of the fibrous texture enables all the organs that it
composes to support the greatest efforts. Thus these organs are all
destined to uses which require this faculty in them. The ligaments
forcibly retain the articular surfaces in their proper relation. The
aponeuroses confine the muscles and oppose their displacement. The
tendons constantly exposed to the contraction of these organs, are at
every instant placed between the strong power that they represent and
the more or less considerable resistance situated at the extremity of
the muscles, &c. Such is this resistance, that it is often greater than
that of the bones themselves. We know that by muscular efforts alone,
the patella, the olecranon process and the os calcis are sometimes
broken; now this could not happen, if the extensor tendons, which
corresponded to these different bones, were of a texture that could be
more easily torn.

It is to this resistance that must be attributed the following
phenomena: 1st. We experience the greatest difficulties in making
luxations in the dead body, principally in the articulations called
enarthrodial. 2d. In the living subject the external efforts are rarely
sufficient to produce them; it is necessary that the powerful action of
the muscles should be added. 3d. The punishment formerly employed, of
drawing the limbs of criminals by attaching horses to them, was much
more terrible, because the resistance of the ligaments made it continue
longer; almost always the horses were unable to produce the separation
of the extremities; it was necessary that a cutting instrument should
assist their efforts. 4th. Weights suspended to a tendon do not break
it unless they are enormous; thus the best strings to be employed in
the arts would be these textures of the fibrous organs, if drying did
not take from these organs their softness and flexibility, if moisture
did not alter them, &c. 5th. We cannot without great efforts tear an
aponeurosis, especially those of any thickness, as the fascia lata, the
albuginea, the dura-mater, &c.

Yet this resistance is sometimes overcome in the living body, and we
sometimes see the rupture of the tendons of the solæus, of the small
plantaris, of the extensors of the thigh, &c. How does it happen, that
the softer texture of the muscle never yields, whilst that of the
tendon much more compact is broken? It is because in these cases the
fleshy fibres are always in contraction; consequently far from being
stretched, as the tendinous fibres are which are then found, if we may
so say, passive, their different portions make an effort to approximate
each other; and they do in fact approximate; this gives to the muscle a
density and hardness equal, and in some cases even much greater, than
those of their tendon, as we can ascertain by applying the hand upon a
muscle in contraction. A proof that this kind of ruptures is owing to
the cause I have mentioned, is this, that if in a dead body we suspend
a weight to a muscle detached from the bone at one of its extremities,
it will be the fleshy and not the tendinous portion that will break.

The fibrous texture has been considered by some anatomists, as being
of a nature approaching that of the muscular texture, and even as
being sometimes the continuation of it. Thus they have said that the
tendon was formed only by an approximation of the fleshy fibres,
which, without changing their nature, only lose their redness. Thus
the aponeuroses of covering have been described as an effect of the
pressure of the surrounding bodies upon the most external fleshy
fibres. In order to see how little foundation there is for this
opinion, it is sufficient to observe, 1st, that the dura-mater, the
sclerotica, the periosteum, the ligaments, are evidently of the same
nature as the tendons and the aponeuroses, and that yet they differ
wholly from the muscular texture; 2d, that the chemical composition,
the vital properties, the apparent texture, are entirely different in
the tendinous and muscular fibre; 3d, that there is no relation between
their functions. There is certainly less analogy between the muscle and
the tendon which receives its insertion, than between that and the bone
which furnishes an attachment to it, and whose cartilaginous portion
approximates it in its nature. A muscle and its tendon form an organic
apparatus and not a simple organ.

What is the nature of the fibrous texture? We know not, because we do
not know any of its properties that are characteristic; it has only the
negative ones of those of the muscular texture which is distinguished
by contractility, and of those of the nervous texture which is
characterized by sensibility. We always see it in a passive state; it
obeys the action that is imparted to it, and has scarcely any of its
own.

It establishes a great difference between the organs in which it
exists and the skin, the cellular texture, the cartilages, the serous
membranes, &c.; thus it was wrong to refer all these parts to one and
the same class designated by the name of the white organs, a vague term
that is only founded upon external appearances, upon the approximation
of analyses yet incomplete, and not upon the texture, the vital
properties, the life and the functions of the organs. Fourcroy foresaw
that this extremely general division would be abandoned after further
experiments.

However this may be, the following are the results which the fibrous
texture gives when subjected to maceration, ebullition, drying, the
action of the acids, &c.

Exposed to maceration in a moderate temperature, the fibrous texture
remains a long time without undergoing any alteration; it preserves
its size, form and density; gradually this last diminishes; the texture
softens; but it does not dilate and swell up; its fibres can then be
separated from each other; we see distinctly between them the cellular
texture that unites them. Finally at the end of a very long time,
they become changed into a soft, whitish pulp, which appears to be
homogeneous. All the fibrous organs do not soften equally quick in this
way. The tendons are the first to yield to maceration. Then come the
aponeuroses; among these, those which are formed by the expansion of a
tendon, soften quicker than those destined to cover the limbs, as the
fascia lata, for example. The fibrous membranes, the capsules and the
sheaths of the same nature are more resisting. Finally the ligaments
yield the slowest to the action of water which tends to soften
them; yet when they come originally from a tendon, as the inferior
ligament of the patella, they are more easily macerated. I have made
comparatively, experiments upon all these organs; they give the results
that I have stated.

Every fibrous organ plunged into boiling water, or exposed to great
heat, crisps and contracts like most of the other animal textures; it
diminishes in size, hence it is more solid; it becomes elastic which
it is not in the natural state, and afterwards it ceases to be so when
it becomes softer before passing into the gelatinous state. By placing
all the parts of this system at the same time in water which is made
gradually to boil, we see that this softening comes upon all at the
same degree, and with nearly the same force. This force, which tends
then to make the fibres of this system contract is very considerable;
it is sufficient to break at the place of their attachments, those of
the periosteum which it raises, by this mechanism, from all the bones
that have been boiled for a length of time; to detach the interosseous
ligaments, the obturator membrane, &c. when we plunge them into
boiling water, with the bones to which they adhere; to contract so
strongly the articular surfaces against each other, that they cannot be
moved, when, surrounded with their ligaments, they have been exposed to
the concentrated action of caloric.

The fibrous texture gradually softens in water, becomes yellowish,
semi-transparent and finally melts in part. By boiling together all the
parts of the fibrous system, I have observed that the tendons soften
first, then the aponeuroses, then the membranes, fibrous capsules and
sheaths, and finally the ligaments, which are, as in maceration, those
that yield last. Many have already made this remark, to which I add
that all do not yield equally. Those placed between the layers of the
vertebræ are the most tenacious; they do not take that yellow colour,
that semi-transparency, common to all the fibrous system when boiled;
they remain white and tough; they appear to contain much less gelatine,
and to be entirely different in their nature.

Exposed to the action of the air, the fibrous system loses its
whiteness by the evaporation of the fluids it contains; it acquires
the horny hardening, becomes yellow, in part transparent and breaks
with facility. Some days after having been dried, if replunged into
water, it becomes nearly as white and soft as it was before; so that
we can truly say, that its white colour is owing to water alone; this
phenomenon takes place especially in the tendons. I have observed also
in these last another remarkable phenomenon; it is that when they have
macerated for some time, and are afterwards dried, they do not become
yellow in drying, but remain of a very decided white. Without doubt the
whole fibrous system would do the same.

The action of sulphuric and nitric acids quickly softens the fibrous
texture, and reduces it to a kind of pulp, blackish in one and
yellowish in the other; at the instant we plunge this texture into the
acid, it crisps and contracts as in boiling water.

The fibrous texture resists in general putrefaction less than the
cartilaginous; but it yields to it more slowly than the medullary,
the cutaneous, the mucous, &c. In the midst of these putrid and
disorganized textures in the subjects in our dissecting rooms, we find
this still untouched; it finally becomes changed also. Water in which
it has been macerated gives an odour less offensive than that which has
been used for the maceration of most of the other systems.

More digestible than the cartilages and the fibro-cartilages, the
fibrous texture is less so than most of the others. The experiments
of Spallanzani and Gosse prove this. It appears that it yields to the
action of the digestive juices in the same order as to maceration,
ebullition, &c.; that is, 1st, the tendons; 2d, the aponeuroses; 3d,
the different fibrous membranes; 4th, the ligaments, which are the
most indigestible. I would observe however that when boiling has once
softened the fibrous texture, it is all digested nearly alike. Thus
the cartilages are as easy, and even more so, of digestion, than the
tendons, when they have become gelatinous, as Spallanzani proved upon
himself, though when raw they are much more indigestible.


II. _Of the Common Parts which enter into the Organization of the
Fibrous System._

The cellular texture exists in all the fibrous organs; but it is more
or less abundant according as the fibres are more or less distant. In
certain ligaments, it forms for the fibrous fasciæ, sheaths analogous
to those of the muscles; in others, in the tendons, the aponeuroses,
&c. we hardly perceive it; but everywhere it becomes very evident by
maceration, by morbid affections, as, for example, by the fungi of
the dura-mater, by the carcinoma of the testicle, which has seized the
albuginea, by certain swellings of the periosteum, &c. In all these
cases the fibrous texture relaxed, softened, preternatural, and of a
spongy nature permits its fibres to separate and the cellular organ to
appear. The development of fleshy granulations, the soft nature which
these granulations have in certain wounds in which the fibrous organ is
concerned, prove also the existence of the cellular organ there, which
is in general in small quantity; this does not contribute a little to
produce the resistance and the force of the organs that belong to it.
Does this cellular texture contain fat? At first view we can hardly
observe it, since we can scarcely distinguish this texture. Yet I have
many times observed that by submitting to desiccation portions of
aponeuroses, periosteum, dura-mater, &c. entirely stripped of every
foreign part, when all these fluids had evaporated, and the organ had
the appearance of parchment, a fatty exudation remaining on many places
on its surface.

The existence of vessels varies in the fibrous system; much developed
in some organs, as in the dura-mater, the periosteum, &c. they are
less so in others, as the aponeuroses, and not at all in some, as
the tendons. I would observe in general that it is in those in which
they are the most evident, that inflammations and the different kinds
of tumours are the most frequently observed. The affections of the
dura-mater, the periosteum, &c. compared with those of the tendons, are
a remarkable proof of this.

I do not know that absorbent vessels have been traced in the fibrous
system.

The nerves appear to be equally foreign to it, notwithstanding what has
been written on those of the periosteum, the dura-mater, &c. &c.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.


I. _Physical Properties._

The fibrous system has but a slight degree of elasticity in the natural
state; but when its different organs are taken from the body and dried,
they acquire it very considerably; thus the tendons, the aponeurotic
expansions, &c. which in a fresh state would be incapable of any
vibration, are found to resound in instruments when they are very dry.


II. _Properties of Texture._

The properties of texture are evident in the fibrous system, but they
are less so than in many others.

Extensibility is seen in the dura-mater, in hydrocephalus, in the
periosteum; in the different enlargements of which the bones are
susceptible; in the aponeuroses, in the swelling of the extremities,
and the distension of the abdominal parietes, which, as we know, are
aponeurotic as well as fleshy; in the fibrous capsules, in articular
dropsies; in the tunica sclerotica and albuginea in the swelling of
their respective organs.

This extensibility of the fibrous system is subjected to an uniform
law, which is unknown to the extensibility of most of the other
systems; it can only take place in a slow, gradual and insensible
manner. Thus when it is too quickly put into action, two different
phenomena take place, which equally suppose the impossibility of its
extending suddenly, as for example, a muscle, the skin, the cellular
texture, &c. do. 1st. If the fibrous organ makes a resistance greater
than the effort which it experiences, then it does not yield, and
different accidents result from it. We have many examples of this,
in the inflammatory swellings that appear under the aponeuroses of
the limbs, under those of the cranium, within the fibrous sheaths of
the tendons, &c. Then these fibrous organs not being able to stretch
with the same rapidity as the subjacent parts which swell, compress
painfully these swollen parts, and sometimes even expose them to
gangrene; this is what takes place in those strangulations so frequent
in surgical practice, and which require different operations to relieve
them. 2d. If the fibrous organ is inferior in its resistance to the
sudden effort which it experiences, it breaks instead of yielding;
hence the rupture of the tendons, the tearing of the fibrous capsules
and of the ligaments in luxations, that of the aponeuroses in certain
very rare cases reported by different authors, &c. &c. We easily
understand that the great resistance with which the fibrous texture is
endowed, is principally owing to the impossibility of yielding suddenly
to the impulse that is given to it.

In the slow and gradual extension of the fibrous organs, we observe
that often instead of becoming thinner and enlarging at the expense of
their thickness, they increase, on the contrary, in this dimension.
The albuginea of a scirrhous testicle, the sclerotica of a dropsical
or cancerous eye, the periosteum of a ricketty bone, &c. show us this
phenomenon, the reverse of which is sometimes observed, as in the
distensions of the abdominal aponeuroses produced by pregnancy, by
ascites, and also in hydrocephalus, &c.

The contractility of texture is accommodated in the fibrous system, to
the degree of its extensibility; as it cannot suddenly be distended,
it cannot suddenly contract when it ceases to be distended. This
fact is remarkable in the division of a tendon, of a portion of
aponeurosis, of a ligament laid bare in a living animal, in an
incision of the dura-mater, to discharge blood effused under it, &c. In
all these cases, the edges of the division undergo a separation hardly
perceptible; thus in the rupture of the tendons, the separation being
produced, not by the contraction of the divided extremities, but only
by the motions of the limb, the contact is effected by the position
in which in the natural state this tendon is not drawn: whilst in a
divided muscle, not only this position is necessary, but that in which
there is the greatest possible relaxation, and yet oftentimes contact
is not effected. If whilst a muscle is stretched, we cut its tendon
in a living animal, the end attached to the fleshy fibres separates a
little from the other by the retraction of these fibres; but that which
is attached to the bone remains immoveable, so that there is then but
one cause of separation to this, whereas there are two in a divided
fleshy part. If we cut a tendon when the muscle is relaxed, its ends
remain in place.

The contractility of texture is evident, however, at the end of some
time, in the fibrous system, especially when the organ has been first
stretched; for, when it is divided in its natural state, it is always
hardly any thing. The sclerotica after the puncture of the eye, or
after the amputation of the anterior half of this organ, and the
evacuation of its humours, the tunica albuginea, the peculiar coat of
the spleen and that of the kidney, after the resolution of a tumour
that had stretched their respective organs, the fibrous capsules
after the discharge of the fluid of articular dropsies, the abdominal
aponeuroses after the first and even the second accouchement, the
periosteum after the resolution of exostoses, &c. gradually contract
and resume their original forms.


III. _Vital Properties._

There is never in the fibrous system animal contractility, nor sensible
organic contractility. Organic sensibility and insensible organic
contractility are found there as in all the other organs.

The animal sensibility exists in it in the natural state; but it
appears in a peculiar way, of which no system in the economy, I
believe, offers an example and which no one has precisely pointed
out. The ordinary agents that put it in action, such as the different
stimulants, mechanical, chemical, &c. cannot develop it here, unless
the organ is in an inflammatory state. The tendons, the aponeuroses,
the fibrous membranes, the ligaments, &c. laid bare in operations,
in experiments upon living animals and irritated in various ways do
not occasion any pain. What has been written on the sensibility of
the periosteum, the dura-mater, &c. taken in this sense is evidently
contrary to observation. But if the fibrous organs are exposed to a
sudden and violent extension, then the animal sensibility is evident in
it to the greatest degree; this fact is particularly remarkable in the
ligaments, the fibrous capsules, the aponeuroses, &c.

Lay bare an articulation in a dog, that of the leg, for example;
dissect carefully the organs that surround it; remove the nerves
especially, so as to leave nothing but the ligaments; irritate these
with a chemical or mechanical agent; the animal remains unmoved and
gives no sign of pain. Then stretch these ligaments, by twisting
the articulation, the animal in an instant throws himself down, is
convulsed, cries out, &c. Finally cut these ligaments so as to leave
only the synovial membrane which exists here without the fibrous
capsule, and twist these two bones in an opposite direction; the
twisting ceases to be painful. The aponeuroses, the tendons even laid
bare and drawn in an opposite direction, produce the same phenomenon.
I have frequently repeated these experiments which prove incontestably
what I have advanced, viz. that the animal sensibility of the fibrous
system, incapable of being brought into action by the ordinary means,
is very evident in the distensions of which they are the seat. Observe
that this manner of being excited is analogous to the functions that it
performs. Separated in fact by its deep position from every external
excitement which can act upon it chemically or mechanically, it has no
need, like the cutaneous system for example, of a sensibility which
would transmit the impression of it; on the contrary, the most of
these organs, as the ligaments, the fibrous capsules, the tendons,
&c. being very subject to being distended, stretched and twisted in
the violent motions of the limbs, it was necessary that they should
communicate to the brain this kind of irritation, the excess of which
might without this become injurious to the articulations or the limbs.
Observe how nature accommodates the animal sensibility of each organ to
the different excitements it may experience, to those especially which
would become dangerous if the mind was not informed of them; for this
vital power is the essential agent by which the animal watches over its
preservation.

It is to this sort of sensibility of the fibrous system that must be
principally attributed, 1st, the acute pains that attend the production
of luxations; 2d, those more severe ones which patients experience in
the extensions necessary to reduce them, especially when, as in those
of long standing, we are obliged to employ considerable force; 3d,
the intolerable suffering of the punishment that consisted in drawing
a criminal with four horses; 4th, the painful sensation which arises
from twisting, which is occasioned by a stretching of the spinal column
and consequently of its ligaments, by turning the head too quickly,
&c.; 5th, the acute pain that those experience immediately before the
accident who break a tendon, a pain which ceases in part when the
rupture takes place; 6th, that less sensible pain which we feel when
any tendon, the tendo Achillis for example, is from a bad position too
much stretched; 7th, the great increase of pain that is experienced,
when a swelling exists under an aponeurosis, which being unable to
yield, is very powerfully raised; 8th, the painful sensation we feel
in the ham when we wish to force the extension of the leg, by which we
stretch the two oblique ligaments destined to confine this extension,
&c. &c.

It is without doubt to the insensibility of the fibrous organs to
one kind of excitement, and their sensibility to another, that must
be referred the contradictory results of the experiments of Haller
on the one part, and those of his antagonists on the other, upon the
dura-mater.


_Character of the Vital Properties._

The vital activity is much greater in the fibrous, than in the osseous
and cartilaginous systems. This is proved very evidently, 1st, by the
degree of animal sensibility which we have just observed in it, and
which is foreign to the other two systems; 2d, by the much greater
disposition of this system to become the seat of pains more or less
frequent, and especially of inflammation, &c.; 3d, by the much more
acute character that this affection has in it, as we see in acute
rheumatism, which principally affects the fibrous parts of the great
articulations of the axilla, the hip, the knee, the elbow, &c. the
aponeurotic part of muscles, &c.; 4th, moreover, by the great mobility
of rheumatic pains, which go with astonishing quickness from one
place to another, which consequently suppose a great quickness in the
alteration of the vital forces of the different parts of this system;
5th, by the greater rapidity of its cicatrization; thus by laying
bare fractures made for the purpose in animals, I have constantly
observed that the fleshy granulations coming from the periosteum and
the medullary organ, are all formed, whilst those furnished by the
bone itself have hardly commenced. I would observe in regard to this
cicatrization, that the parts of the fibrous system in which the
greatest number of blood vessels enter, as the periosteum, the fibrous
membranes, the capsules, &c. are the most capable of this phenomenon,
which takes place with much more difficulty in those where little or
scarcely any blood goes, as in the tendons, the ends of which are very
slow in uniting; 6th, we may finally be convinced of the difference
of vitality of the fibrous system and that of the preceding ones, by
the progress of an exostosis compared with that of periostosis, or a
swelling of the dura-mater, &c. Yet there is still in respect to the
vitality a remarkable slowness in this system. We see it especially in
certain affections of the limbs, in which gangrene takes place, and
makes, like the inflammation that precedes it, rapid progress in the
cellular texture, the muscles, &c. whilst that, as I have said, the
tendons that have been laid bare do not alter until some time after,
and are remarkable for their whiteness in the midst of the general
blackness or lividity.

The fibrous system presents a remarkable phenomenon; it is that it
hardly ever contributes to the formation of pus. I do not know that
after inflammations of this system, purulent collections have been ever
observed. Rheumatism, which is ranked with the phlegmasiæ, is never
accompanied by these collections; some gelatinous extravasations only
have been found around the tendons. That which was formerly taken for a
suppuration of the dura-mater in wounds of the head, is very evidently
a purulent oozing from the arachnoides, analogous to that of all the
other serous membranes. Why does this system refuse, or produce pus
with so much difficulty, or why is it not as much disposed to do it
as most of the other systems? I know not. Nor do I know that in the
midst of the cartilages collections of this fluid have been found. The
inflammations of the cartilaginous system are remarkable, because they
rarely or never terminate by suppuration.


_Sympathies._

All the kinds of sympathies are observed in the fibrous system. Among
the animal sympathies, the following are some of sensibility. 1st. In
certain periostoses which occupy but a small surface, the whole of the
periosteum of the bone that remains sound, becomes painful. 2d. After
a puncture, or bruise of the periosteum, the whole of the limb often
swells and becomes painful. 3d. In the affections of the dura-mater,
the eye is frequently affected, and cannot bear the light, a phenomenon
which may also depend on the communication of the cellular texture, but
which is certainly sometimes sympathetic. 4th. When we make extension
to reduce a luxation, and the articular ligaments consequently suffer
much, the patient often complains of pain in a very distant part of the
limb, &c.

Contractility is also brought into action in the animal sympathies of
the fibrous system. 1st. The puncture of the centre of the diaphragm
causes, it is said, in the facial muscles, a contraction which produces
a sardonic smile. 2d. The injury of the aponeuroses, the stretching
of the ligaments in the luxations of the foot and the tearing of the
tendons, are frequently accompanied by convulsive motions of the jaws
and even well marked tetanus. 3d. A splinter fixed in the dura-mater
produces contractions in the different muscles of the economy. 4th.
In injuries of the albuginea and the external aponeuroses, we often
observe similar phenomena.

In the organic sympathies of the fibrous system, it is sometimes
the insensible organic contractility that is brought into action,
and sometimes the sensible organic contractility; the following
are examples of the first. 1st. The dura-mater being inflamed, the
inflammation which always supposes an increase of the tonic forces
or of the insensible organic contractility, is often discoverable in
the pericranium and vice versa. 2d. The irritation of a considerable
extent of the periosteum often makes the medullary organ inflame and
suppurate. 3d. The articular ligaments being stretched by twisting,
all the neighbouring parts, and frequently the whole limb, swell and
become a centre of irritation in which all the vital forces of life,
insensible contractility in particular, are found much more raised than
usual, &c.

At other times it is the sensible organic contractility which is
brought into action. 1st. We often observe in the operation for
cataract by depression, that the wound of the sclerotica occasions
sympathetic vomitings, risings of the stomach, intestines, &c. 2d.
A violent pain in any part, in the fibrous system in particular,
increases very much the sensible organic contractility of the heart
and thus produces from sympathy an acceleration in the motion which
it gives to the blood. 3d. I have seen a man in whom Desault reduced
a luxation, and who, from the great pain which the stretching of the
ligaments gave him, was unable to retain his fœces, so great was the
contraction of the rectum.

We see that in these sympathies, it is sometimes the fibrous system
which exerts its influence upon the others, and sometimes they exert
their action upon it. It is principally when it is drawn, when the
peculiar kind of animal sensibility which it enjoys is put into action
that it occasions in the whole economy a remarkable sympathetic
derangement. I presume the ancients considered as nerves all the
white parts, the ligaments, the tendons, &c. on account of the very
serious accidents they had observed from their stretching in sprains,
in complicated luxations of the knee, the elbow, the ankle, luxations
which can never be produced without a violent stretching of many
ligaments, of aponeurotic and tendinous parts, &c. A stroke of a sabre
which divides the ligaments of the tarsus, a body which bruises them,
produce consequences much less serious, than a false step that twists
them. This leads us to an important general consideration, the truth
of which is proved by the examination of the other systems; viz. that
it is the predominant vital property in a system, which is especially
brought into action by sympathies. As the animal sensibility, capable
of responding to the agents of distension, is here the most strongly
marked, it is this that performs the principal part in the fibrous
sympathies.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.


I. _State of the Fibrous System in the first age._

In the midst of the mucous state of the embryo, we cannot distinguish
the fibrous organs. All is confounded; it is not until many other
organs are formed, that we discover any traces of them. Those in the
form of membranes appear at first like transparent nets; those arranged
in fasciæ seem to be a homogeneous body. In general the fibres are not
distinct in the first age; the aponeuroses, the fibrous membranes,
the tendons, &c. do not exhibit any trace of them; all then seems
to be uniform in the texture of the fibrous organs. In the fœtus of
seven months, we begin to distinguish the white fibres. Few at first,
and distant from each other, they gradually approximate after birth,
are arranged in a parallel manner, or cross in different directions,
according to the organ which they finally possess themselves of
entirely at a certain age. It is especially on the phrenic centre of
the diaphragm, the dura-mater, the aponeurosis of the thigh, that we
easily make these observations.

As the fibres are developed in the fibrous organs, they have more
resistance and hardness. In the fœtus and in the first years, they are
extremely soft and easily yield. Their whiteness has a tinge wholly
different from that of a more advanced age; they are of a pearly white.
It is only gradually that they arrive at that degree of force that
especially characterizes them.

It is to this softness, this want of resistance of the fibrous system
in the first years, that the following phenomena must be attributed.
1st. The articulations yield at this age to motions which the stiffness
of the ligaments afterwards renders impossible; all extensions can
then be carried beyond their natural degree. We know that it is at
this period that tumblers begin to practice; they would never be able
to execute those extraordinary motions, which astonish us, if habit
did not preserve in them from infancy the power of these motions. 2d.
Luxations are in general rare in the first age, because the fibrous
capsules yield and do not break. 3d. Sprains have then less serious
consequences. 4th. The inflammatory swellings under the aponeuroses are
rarely susceptible of those strangulations oftentimes so severe at the
adult age. 5th. This softness of the fibrous system accommodates itself
also in the tendons, the ligaments, the aponeuroses, &c. on the one
hand to the multiplicity and frequency, and on the other to the want of
power of the motions of the infant.

I would remark, that although the fibrous system has in the first age a
softness of texture nearly uniform in all the parts that belong to the
same order, yet it is more or less developed according to the regions
in which it is found. In general, when it belongs to the organs that
are early developed, as to the brain by the dura-mater, to the eyes
by the sclerotica, &c. it has in proportion more size and thickness;
but it is only in its dimensions, and not in its intimate organization,
that these differences then exist.

It is probable that this mode of organization of the fibrous system
has an influence, at the period of which we are treating, upon its
degree of vitality and consequently upon its diseases. We know that
rheumatism, which appears very probably to affect this system, is
rarely the attendant of children of the first age; that in a hundred
patients affected with it, there are ninety at least above the age of
fifteen or sixteen years.

Subjected to ebullition, the fibrous system of the fœtus and the infant
easily melts, but does not take that yellow colour, which it constantly
has, when boiled in the adult age; we know that the jellies made from
young animals are much whiter than those from older ones.


II. _State of the Fibrous System in the after ages._

As we advance in age the fibrous system becomes stronger and more
compact; it remains stationary in the adult age, though the alternate
absorption and exhalation of nutritive substances constantly continue.
These two functions can scarcely be seen in the ordinary state; but the
first is very apparent when from a contusion or any internal cause, the
periosteum, the fibrous capsules, the ligaments, &c. swell. The second
in its turn predominates, when the swelling subsides and resolution
takes place.

In old persons, the fibrous system becomes more and more compact and
contracted; it yields more slowly to maceration and putrefaction. The
teeth of animals that feed upon it, tear it with more difficulty; the
gastric juices act upon it less easily. Spallanzani has observed, that
the tendons and aponeuroses of old animals were much more indigestible
than those of young ones. With age, the force of the fibrous texture
increases; but its softness diminishes; hence the difficulty of the
motions, from its stiffness. The ligaments and the fibrous capsules do
not allow the articular surfaces to separate easily from each other;
the tendons bend with difficulty; when we pass externally on places
where they are directly under the integuments, we perceive that they
are hard, not supple, &c. It requires a long time to soften them by
ebullition. The whole fibrous system becomes yellow. We should say that
it approached then that state in which it is compact, semi-transparent
and has the horny hardening to which desiccation reduces it; so that if
we could suppose this system going through quicker than the others the
different periods of its decrease, all the motions would cease from the
rigidity of the ligaments, tendons and aponeuroses, though the energy
of contraction might still subsist in the muscles.


III. _Preternatural Development of the Fibrous System._

We have seen that different productions belonging, by their nature, to
the osseous or cartilaginous systems, are sometimes preternaturally
developed in certain parts. Morbid anatomy also shows us productions,
in which the fibrous appearance is very evident. I have many times
made this observation in tumours of the womb, the fallopian tubes,
&c. Instead of the lardy matter which is so common in these organic
affections, we see one or several masses of fibres, very distinct,
yellow, &c. I cannot however say that these excrescences belong
essentially, by the substances that compose them, to the fibrous
system, not having made upon them, experiments similar to those which I
have made upon the organs of this system.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

OF THE FIBROUS MEMBRANES IN GENERAL.

After having considered the fibrous system in a general manner, as
it relates to its organization, its life, its properties and its
nutrition, I shall now examine it more particularly in the great
divisions it offers, and which we have pointed out above. I begin with
the fibrous membranes.


I. _Forms of the Fibrous Membranes._

These membranes which comprehend, as has been said, the periosteum, the
dura-mater, the sclerotica, the albuginea, the peculiar membrane of the
spleen, the kidneys, the corpus cavernosum, &c. are almost all destined
to form external coverings, kind of sacs in which are contained the
organs they invest.

These organs are not, like those around which the serous surfaces are
spread, as the stomach, the intestines, the bladder and the lungs,
subject to alternate dilatations and contractions. This would not
accord with their degree of extensibility. They are fitted exactly to
the form of these organs, and have none of those numerous folds which
we see in the serous membranes, if we except however the dura-mater.
Their two surfaces are adherent; a character which distinguishes them
especially from the preceding membranes, as well as from the mucous.

One of these surfaces, intimately united to the organ, appears to send
various elongations into it, which identify at first view its existence
with that of the membrane. Many fibres detached from the albuginea,
from the covering of the corpus cavernosum, from the peculiar tunic
of the spleen, &c. or rather adhering to these tunics, penetrate the
respective organs of these membranes, and crossing there in various
directions, form as it were the outline and frame, around which are
arranged and supported the other constituent parts of these organs,
which seem from this to have the external membranes for a mould; as we
see when these moulds are removed, irregular vegetations shooting up
here and there. The callus, in displacements too great to allow the
periosteum to extend over the divided surfaces, is rough and uneven.
The form of the testicle alters, when the albuginea has been divided at
any part. This adherence of the fibrous membrane which covers different
organs, to the internal elongations of these organs, and the fibres
which compose their outline, has made anatomists believe that the
nature of one was the same as that of the others, that these were but
elongations of the membrane. I thought so when I published my Treatise
on the Membranes; but new experiments have since convinced me of the
contrary.

I am confident that the membrane of the corpora cavernosa belongs to
the fibrous system alone. The internal spongy texture, contained in
the cavity of this membrane, has not the nature of it, is not as all
anatomists say an elongation of it. The spongy texture is not made by
laminæ, which, according to the common expression, are detached from
the membrane and produce it by their interlacing. This is a separate
body, unlike in its life and its properties.

By exposing a corpus cavernosum to ebullition, I have evidently
observed this difference; the external membrane does, like all the
fibrous organs, become thick, yellowish, semi-transparent, then melts
more or less into gelatine; the spongy texture, on the contrary,
remains white, soft, does not increase in size, hardly crisps at all
from the action of fire, exhibits, in a word, an appearance which I can
compare to no texture treated in the same way by ebullition.

Maceration also answers very well to distinguish these two textures.
The first yields but slowly to it; its fibres remain a long time
distinct; they have still their natural arrangement, when the second
is already reduced to a homogeneous, reddish pulp, in which nothing
fibrous, nothing organized can be any longer traced. In general, it
appears that the spongy texture of the corpora cavernosa is their
essential part, that in which the great phenomena of erection take
place, that which animates the peculiar kind of mobility which
distinguishes it from the other organs. The fibrous shell is only
accessory to its functions; it is but a covering; it is only formed to
obey in erection the impulse which is communicated to it.

When we expose the corpus cavernosum to the action of the nitric acid,
the spongy texture, freed from the blood it contained, becomes of
a much deeper yellow than the fibrous membrane; this enables us to
distinguish them clearly from each other.

By exposing the testicle to the action of boiling water, we also
observe that its internal texture assumes an aspect wholly different
from that of its external membrane; it becomes of a deep brown, whilst
the other remains white; it does not assume the gelatinous appearance
in so decided or in so prompt a manner as that of the corpus cavernosum.

Subjected to maceration, the testicle is also wholly different in its
covering and in its internal texture.

The surface of the fibrous membranes, opposite to that which
corresponds to their organ, is joined to the neighbouring parts,
sometimes in a loose manner, as the covering of the corpus cavernosum,
sometimes by very tight bands, as the dura-mater. In general the
membranes, and even all the fibrous organs, have a singular tendency
to unite intimately to the serous and mucous surfaces. We find examples
of this in the serous membranes in the union of the dura-mater with
the arachnoides, of the albuginea with the tunica vaginalis, and the
fibrous capsules with the synovial. Such is the intimacy of this
adhesion, that the most careful dissection cannot destroy it in adult
age. In infancy, it is much less, as we see very well especially in
the relation that exists between the base of the pericardium and
the phrenic centre, a relation which is such, that we can with ease
separate in the first age the two surfaces which are rather contiguous
than continuous, whilst in the after ages we are unable to do it.

As to the union of the mucous surfaces with the fibrous, when they are
found contiguous, they are entirely confounded; this is observed in
the pituitary membrane, in that of the sinuses, of the ear, &c. The
perichondrium of the larynx and of the trachea is only a part of their
internal membrane. In all these parts, the periosteum so intermixes
with the mucous surface, that it is impossible to separate them, and
they are removed together from the bone, which then remains bare. The
vas deferens, the fallopian tubes, the ureters, &c. are also very
evidently fibro-mucous.


II. _Organization of the Fibrous Membranes._

The fibrous membranes have in general a very compact texture, of a
remarkable thickness; they are formed only of a single lamina. The
dura-mater seems to be an exception to this rule, as its folds form
the falciform process and the tentorium cerebelli; but except at the
place of the sinuses, it is difficult and even impossible, to find two
distinct laminæ.

These membranes have more vessels than all the other divisions of the
fibrous system; they are perforated by a great number of foramina for
the passage of these vessels, most of which only pass through them,
and afterwards go to the organs they cover. These foramina, each of
which is larger than the branch it transmits, form also a character
of the fibrous membranes, distinct from the serous, which are always
folded up, and never open to allow the vascular system to penetrate
their respective organs.

The particular description however of the membranes of which we are
treating, will be added to that of the organs they surround. I shall
except the periosteum, whose description belongs to and may be made in
a general way, whether because clothing the whole osseous system, we
cannot consider it separately, or because, as I have said, it is the
centre from which arise and to which go all the organs of the fibrous
system, so that its functions relate still more to this system than to
that of the bones.


III. _Of the Periosteum. Of its Form._

This membrane surrounds all the bones. Hard, resisting, of a grey
colour, it forms for them a covering which extends everywhere, except
where the cartilages cover them. Its thickness is remarkable in
infancy; it is thinner in proportion in the adult and becomes more firm
and compact.

The ancients described it as extending from one bone to another over
the articulation, and thus forming a continuous sac for the whole
skeleton. This idea is incorrect. At the junction of the bones, the
periosteum intermixes with the ligaments which serve it as a means of
communication, and it is in this way only that we can understand its
continuity. The crown of the teeth is destitute of it, as well as all
the osseous productions that grow upon the head of certain animals.

The periosteum is feebly united to the bone in infancy; it can then be
separated with great ease, especially on the middle part of the long
bones. In the adult, as the calcareous substance gradually encrusts its
most internal fibres, the adhesion becomes very strong; it is extreme
in old age, in which this membrane is often reduced to a very delicate
layer by the progress of ossification. The constant pressure exerted
by the muscles in their contractions, can also have a little influence
upon this adhesion. Various elongations pass from the periosteum to the
bone. They are much more numerous at the extremities of the long bones
and upon the short bones, than upon the middle of the long bones, or
the broad ones; which may easily be conceived of, from the much greater
number of foramina in one than the other part. These elongations
accompany the vessels, line the canals which pierce through the bone,
are lost in those which terminate in its substance, do not penetrate
the medullary cavity, and confined to the osseous texture alone,
establish, between it and the membrane from which they arise, immediate
relations.

It is the destruction of these relations, when the periosteum is
diseased or destroyed for a considerable extent, that produces the
death and separation of the bone. There is however this difference
between this phenomenon and the death of the bone by the injury of the
medullary membrane, that if this is disorganized, necrosis seizes upon
the whole bone, whilst if we irritate and tear the periosteum in the
middle part of a long bone, for an extent nearly equal to that of this
medullary membrane, the external laminæ of the compact texture alone
are detached by exfoliation, and the bone remains the same. I have made
this experiment the year past upon two dogs. As to that which consists
in removing the periosteum, not only from the middle part, but from the
whole surface of the bone, I do not know that any one has been able to
try it; it has appeared to me impossible; it might be practicable, but
the animal would soon die from the extent of the injury, and thus we
could have no result from it.

The relations of the periosteum with the neighbouring organs vary
remarkably. In the greatest number of bones, there are muscles that
slide upon it; the cellular texture unites it to them more or less
closely according as the motions are more or less considerable. In
consequence of inflammations, it loses this laxity, and often all
motion ceases.


_Organization of the Periosteum._

The direction of the fibres of the periosteum is nearly analogous to
that of the bones, the long bones especially as well as the short; but
it has not the radiated structure of the flat bones that it covers.
These fibres placed upon each other, have different lengths; the
superficial ones are the longest; those which correspond immediately
with the bone run but a short distance. In general all become very
evident in some diseases of the bones. I recollect among other examples
of the preternatural development of the fibres, a man affected with
elephantiasis, and at the same time a swelling of the compact texture
of the tibia, which was of a remarkable thickness. The periosteum of
this bone was very thick, and adhered so little to the bone, that
the slightest effort was sufficient to raise it in its whole extent,
and its fibres were so distinct, that it might have been taken, when
separated from the bone, for a portion of plantar or palmar aponeurosis.

The periosteum borrows its vessels from those of the neighbouring
parts. Their innumerable branches ramify in it ad infinitum, form there
a net-work, which injections, especially in infants, make very evident,
they are afterwards lost in it, or penetrate the compact texture of the
bone, or return to the neighbouring parts to form anastomoses.

This membrane receives, as we have said, the insertion of almost all
the fibrous system, of the tendons, the ligaments and especially the
aponeuroses. This insertion has no connexion with the bone in infancy;
but ossification soon seizing upon the most internal laminæ, all the
fibrous organs appear to be identified with the bone in the adult. I
would observe that this arrangement coincides with the prodigious power
of drawing that the muscles, having become more developed, often exert
at this age, and which only spent upon the periosteum, as it would have
been without its ossification, would not have found in it a sufficient
resistance, whereas acting also upon the bone, it moves it without
endangering its covering. The general organization, the properties and
the life of the periosteum are the same as those of the fibrous system;
I shall not treat of them.


_Development of the Periosteum._

In the fœtus, this membrane is soft, spongy, containing much gelatinous
fluid; it melts easily in water; its fibres are not distinct; they
become so as we advance in age, and at the same time the softness
diminishes and the resistance increases. The periosteum in old age
has extreme tenacity; it resists ebullition almost as much as the
ligaments; those who prepare skeletons know this very well. It tears in
various places, because its fibres in contracting are detached from the
bone; but what remains becomes with great difficulty gelatinous.


_Functions of the Periosteum._

The periosteum defends the bones which it covers from the impression
of the moveable parts that surround it, from that of the muscles, of
the arteries, whose pulsation would wear them, as happens in certain
aneurismal tumours near the sternum, the vertebræ, &c.

It is a kind of parenchyma of nutrition in reserve, if I may so express
myself, always ready to receive the phosphate of lime, when it cannot
be carried upon the bone that has become diseased; hence natural and
artificial necroses which never take place in the teeth, from the
want of this membrane. These little bones have caries and various
alterations, but not true necrosis.

We cannot doubt that the internal laminæ of the periosteum are
successively ossified, and thus contribute not a little to increase
the bone in thickness, when its increase in length is finished. I
would observe upon this subject, that not only it, but all the fibrous
system, has a singular affinity with the phosphate of lime. Next to
the cartilaginous system, it has the greatest tendency to be encrusted
with it, no doubt because its kind of general vitality, of organic
sensibility in particular, has much analogy with that of the bones.
Where the tendons in sliding upon the bones experience great friction
they become osseous. The dura-mater and the tunica albuginea are very
often ossified; the sclerotica serves as a parenchyma for much earthy
substance in birds, which in consequence have it extremely hard.

The periosteum has no connexion with the formation of the bones; it
is only accessory to that of the callus; it is a kind of limit which
circumscribes within its natural bounds the progress of ossification,
and keeps it from irregular aberrations. Does it prepare the blood
which serves to nourish the bones? This question cannot be settled by
any experiment; but we are sure that the vital properties which it
enjoys, do not enable it to accelerate the circulation of the blood
arriving at the bones, as some authors have thought.

It seems to me moreover that they have described the periosteum too
exclusively in relation to the bones; no doubt it is necessary to these
organs; but perhaps it performs in relation to the fibrous organs a
still more important part. If nature has placed it everywhere on the
osseous system, it is probably in great part, as I have said, because
it finds in this system a general, solid and resisting support, which
enables it to resist the various drawings, that the whole fibrous
system makes upon it, drawings which are sometimes communicated to this
last system. This is a new point of view in which the periosteum should
be described, and it will yield much more to general considerations,
than that in which Duhamel, Fougeroux, &c. have considered this
membrane.


IV. _Perichondrium._

We find on all the non-articular cartilages a membrane exactly
analogous to the periosteum, and which is called perichondrium. The
larynx, the ribs, &c. exhibit it in a very evident manner; it is
delicate, with fibres interlaced in all directions, less closely
united to the organs it covers, than the periosteum is to the bones,
because the cartilages having on their surface less numerous foramina,
it does not send to them as many fibrous elongations; hence a less
intimate relation between the life of the perichondrium and that of the
cartilage, than between that of the bone and its periosteum.

I have twice in a young dog removed from the thyroid its external
membrane, and closed the wound immediately, which has been cured
without apparent alteration in the organization of the cartilage; at
least it has continued to perform its functions. The same experiment
might easily be made on the cartilages of the ribs; I have not
attempted it. The perichondrium has appeared to me in many injections
to contain fewer blood vessels than the periosteum; its uses are
analogous to those of this last membrane.


ARTICLE SIXTH.

OF THE FIBROUS CAPSULES.

The fibrous capsules are infinitely more rare in the economy, than
they have heretofore been thought to be. The scapulo-humeral and the
ilio-femoral articulations are almost the only ones furnished with
them. Elsewhere there is nothing scarcely but synovial membranes.


I. _Forms of the Fibrous Capsules._

These capsules form a kind of cylindrical sac open at the two
extremities, attached by the circumference of its openings, around the
superior and inferior articular surfaces, intermixing at its insertion
with the periosteum. They are so much the more loose, as the motions
of the articulations are the more extended; that of the humerus, for
example, allows a much greater separation of the osseous articular
surfaces, than that of the femur; their length in fact is almost the
same. Now, as on the one hand, the neck of the first bone is much less
than that of the second, and as on the other, both these capsules are
inserted at the base of this neck, it follows that the extent of the
separation is in the inverse ratio of the length of the articular necks.

Much cellular texture surrounds these capsules externally, which the
tendinous fibres and even the tendons coming from the neighbouring
muscles, strengthen remarkably. They are sometimes open to allow
tendons to pass which are inserted in the bone between them and the
synovial membrane, an example of this is seen in the scapulo-humeral
articulation for the sub-scapularis. Anatomists who have observed
the insertion of the tendons in the capsules, have concluded from it,
that the muscles of these tendons were destined to prevent the capsule
from being pinched by the articular surfaces in motion. This appears
to me improbable; but at least the muscles are destined to prevent
the looseness of the capsule during the great motions, which would
have been weakened by this looseness; thus there are many of this
kind of muscles at the humeral capsule, whilst we see none of them at
the femoral, which is, as I have said, much less loose. Within, the
capsules are very closely united to the synovial membrane, especially
in adults; for in infants, this adhesion is less. Near their extremity
however this relation does not exist, because the synovial membrane
being reflected upon the cartilage, a triangular space is left
between it and the capsule which is attached to the bone, and as this
arrangement continues all round the articulation, there results from
it a kind of circular canal, filled with cellular texture, and covered
with vessels, which I have sometimes distended with an injection pushed
into a small opening made for the purpose.

The intimate union of the capsule with the synovial membrane prevents
its folds and also its contusion in the great articular motions.


II. _Functions of the Fibrous Capsules._

Why are the fibrous capsules found only around the first kind of
articulations? The reason of it is plain; as these articulations have
in all directions motions nearly equal, they should have on all sides
an equal resistance, whilst the others moving in one or two directions
only, the ligaments were unnecessary except at certain places, to limit
these motions. Hence why for example, the fibrous system is spread out
like a membrane around the ilio-femoral articulation, and collected
into distinct fasciæ around the femoro-tibial, where the synovial
membrane is almost everywhere bare.

We understand from all that has been said, that the only use of the
fibrous capsules is to strengthen the articular relations, and that
this use has no connexion with synovial exhalation.

When in luxations not reduced, the head of the bone has left the
articular cavity, a new membrane is formed around it in the cellular
texture which serves for a capsule; but this membrane has not the
texture of the former one. I have observed in two subjects, that no
fibre could be distinguished in it, that its texture was very analogous
to that of the different cysts that are often found in many parts of
the economy, of those especially that form round foreign bodies, the
presence of which is not a cause of suppuration, and that consequently
these preternatural capsules belong rather to the class of serous than
to that of the fibrous membranes.


ARTICLE SEVENTH.

OF THE FIBROUS SHEATHS.

The fibrous sheaths are, as we have said, partial or general.


I. _Partial Fibrous Sheaths._

The partial sheaths destined to a single tendon are of two sorts; one
runs a long course; such are those of the flexors of the foot and the
hand, which correspond to the whole concave surface of the phalanges;
the others form only a kind of rings, in which a tendon is reflected,
an example of which is seen in the great oblique muscle of the eye.

All in general form a semi-circle and make half of a canal which the
bone completes; so that the tendon slides in a canal half osseous
and half fibrous. This canal is lined by a synovial membrane, the
attachment of which to the fibrous sheath is equal to that of the
articular synovial membrane to its capsule. By their external surface,
the fibrous sheaths correspond with the neighbouring organs, to which
they are united by a loose cellular texture.

All these sheaths are of a very dense and compact texture; they are
stronger in proportion to the effort which the tendons can exert upon
them, than the fibrous capsules are in relation to the different
impulses which the bones can communicate to them and which tend to
rupture these capsules. They are confounded with the periosteum at
their two edges. Those of the flexors unite also by their extremity
with the expansion of the tendons; hence the very considerable fibrous
interlacing that is observed at the extremity of the last phalanges.

In the limbs, the flexors only have these sheaths; the extensors
are destitute of them. This arises first from this, that there are
two tendons of the first kind to each finger, whilst there is only
one of the second, and that consequently more force is necessary to
retain them in the first direction. In the second place, each extensor
tendon receives on its sides the insertion of the small tendons of the
interosseous muscles and the lumbricales, which by drawing it in an
opposite direction in the great motions, retain it in its place, and
thus compensate for the fibrous sheaths that are wanting. Finally the
efforts of the extensors are much less than those of the flexors, of
which they are as it were but a kind of moderators.


II. _General Fibrous Sheaths._

The general sheaths are seen especially at the wrist and the instep,
where they have the name of annular ligaments. They are destined to
confine many tendons together. As in these two places, all those of the
hand and the foot pass in a very narrow space, it is necessary that
they should be strongly supported. Besides, these sheaths serve also
sometimes to change their direction, as we see in those that go to the
thumb, whether to its palmar or its dorsal face, and which evidently
make an angle at the place of their passage under the sheath. The
tendons of the little finger have also an analogous arrangement.

These sheaths exhibit also two great modifications; in the one, as on
the anterior part of the wrist, all the tendons are found contiguous,
separated only by a kind of loose membrane which is placed between
them; in the others, as on the posterior part of the wrist, under the
general sheath, are found small fibrous partitions, which separate the
tendons from each other. In general, the resistance of these sheaths is
very considerable.


ARTICLE EIGHTH.

OF THE APONEUROSES.

We have distinguished aponeuroses as being of two classes, those for
covering and those for insertion.


I. _Of the Aponeuroses for Covering._

The aponeuroses for covering are general or partial.


_Aponeuroses for General Covering._

They are found around the limbs, whose muscles they tie down. The
arm, the fore-arm and the hand, the thigh, the leg and the foot, are
provided with them.


_Forms._

They are, in their conformation, analogous to the form of the limb,
which they in part determine, and which they especially maintain, by
preventing the displacement of the subjacent parts, a displacement
which would continually take place, from the laxity of the cutaneous
organ. Their thickness varies. In general, the greater the number of
the muscles they cover, the greater their thickness; hence why the
aponeurosis of the fascia lata is superior in this respect to the
brachial; why that of the fore-arm is thicker in front than behind; why
the plantar and palmar are so considerable, whilst hardly any fibres
are found on the back part of the foot and the hand. There are however
some exceptions to this rule; for example, the aponeurotic covering
of the posterior part of the leg is not in proportion to the power
of the gastrocnemii and solæus muscles; thus these muscles are more
than all the others exposed to displacements, frequently very painful,
which constitute cramp, and which it is necessary to distinguish from
the pains or numbness which result from the compression of one of the
nerves of the lower limbs, as of the sciatic, or the external plantar,
a compression produced by a bad position, or any other analogous cause.

Externally, the aponeuroses of the general covering are contiguous to
the integuments. A very loose texture unites them, so that the latter
can easily slide over them in external pressures. Immoveable between
these motions and those of the muscles, they entirely separate them; so
that the skin and the muscles that correspond to it, have not, in this
respect, any influence upon each other.

Within, these aponeuroses are in general loosely joined to the muscles
by cellular texture. Here and there they send between the different
muscular layers numerous elongations, which are afterwards attached
to the bone, and which, at the same time that they furnish points of
attachment, increase the solidity of the covering of the limb.


_Tensor Muscles._

The aponeuroses for general covering have almost all one or two
particular muscles that are inserted in them in whole or in part, and
which are destined to give them a degree of tension or relaxation
proportioned to the state of the limb. This arrangement is remarkable
in the insertion, 1st, of the great dorsal and pectoral muscles in
the brachial aponeurosis; 2d, of the biceps in that of the fore-arm;
3d, of the palmaris longus in the palmar; 4th, of the glutæus maximus
and of the fascia lata in the aponeuroses of that name; 5th, of the
semi-tendinosus, semi-membranosus and biceps in the tibial.

As in the great motions of the limbs, in which all the muscles are the
most liable to be displaced, these are necessarily in action, they
distend powerfully the aponeurosis, which thus reflects the motion that
is communicated to it, and resists especially every displacement. When
the limb is at rest, the tensor muscles cease their contraction, and
the aponeurosis is relaxed. I would observe, that the muscles attached
to the fibrous capsules, as to that of the humerus, for example,
perform for them the same functions, that the tensor muscles do for
their respective aponeuroses.

The colour of these last is a brilliant white; in this respect they
differ from all the fibrous organs thus far examined, and are analogous
to the tendons, from which they differ a little however in their
nature; in fact, they yield less quickly to maceration and ebullition;
their fibres are more stiff and resisting. There are no aponeuroses
exactly like the tendons, except those which are essentially formed by
their expansion or which are at their origin, as those spread upon the
anterior rectus of the thigh, those which are concealed in the fleshy
fibres of a muscle, and afterwards go out of it to become a tendon. In
certain parts of the limbs, as at the top of the arm, for example, the
aponeuroses of general covering are insensibly lost in the cellular
texture, without our being able to draw the line of demarcation. This
arrangement is almost peculiar to the fibrous system; at least I know
of no one which thus intermixes and loses its fibres in the cellular
texture; it is so much the more remarkable, as the nature of the two
textures is essentially different; they do not yield the same products,
and they have not the same organic arrangement.

The fibres of the general aponeuroses are only interlaced in two or
three directions; this interlacing is almost always very evident to
the naked eye. But I have observed that by plunging an aponeurosis
into boiling water, and leaving it there for some time, its fibres, in
the horny hardening they then undergo, become still much more evident.
This observation is moreover applicable to the whole fibrous system,
to its organs especially, whose texture but little apparent seems at
first view to be homogeneous. In this way, we distinguish very well the
fibres of the dura-mater.


_Functions._

The constant compression made upon the limbs by their aponeuroses,
besides the uses pointed out, has that of favouring the circulation
of the red and white fluids. Thus varices, which are very rare in the
deep veins which accompany the arteries, are extremely common in the
superficial ones placed beyond the influence of this compression, which
art imitates by the application of tight bandages, the effect of which
is so advantageous in many external diseases arising from the want of
tone, and the relaxation of the parts. I have uniformly observed that
the serous infiltrations always begin in the sub-cutaneous cellular
texture, that it is only in an advanced stage of dropsy, that we find
effusion in that which is under the aponeuroses, and that in general
it does not contain as much serum in proportion as the other. In
most of the great distensions of dropsical limbs, when the skin is
removed and the subjacent water has flown off, the limb covered by its
aponeurosis, is scarcely larger than in the ordinary state. The muscles
not protected by these coverings, like those situated on the sides of
the abdomen for example, become dropsical much more easily.


_Aponeuroses for Partial Covering._

These aponeuroses are met with in insulated parts, in front of the
abdomen, on the head, the back, &c.; they are usually destined to
retain in place a certain number of muscles which they do not surround
on all sides, like the preceding, but with which they correspond
only in one direction. Their thickness is much less than that of the
preceding ones; it is adapted to the efforts that they are to support.

All have a tensor muscle which proportions their degree of relaxation
or of tension to the effort of the neighbouring muscles. The anterior
rectus, by means of its intersections, and the pyramidalis, perform
this office for the abdominal aponeuroses; the small posterior
dorsocostals do it for that which covers the muscles of the vertebral
foramina; the auricular, the frontal and the occipital for that of the
cranium.

The aponeuroses of covering, whose use is limited to one muscle only,
like that, for example, of the temporal, want the tensor muscle, and
have consequently the same degree of tension always; it is on this
account no doubt that they have a very compact and thick texture, as
that which I have just mentioned is an example.

In general, the use of all the aponeuroses of covering whether general
or partial, relative to the compression of muscles, is required by
the displacements of which they would be susceptible in contracting,
displacements evident, 1st, when we place the hand upon a muscle in
action, and which is destitute of aponeurosis, as the masseter; 2d,
when a wound having injured a considerable part of an aponeurosis of
covering, the subjacent muscles become accidentally contiguous to
the integuments; 3d, when in an animal we lay bare the muscles of a
limb, and leave only the cellular texture to confine them, and in this
state excite their contraction; 4th, in certain wounds of the muscles
happening at the instant of their contraction, it is difficult to
probe these wounds, because in their relaxation the muscles taking a
different position, the relations change between the parts that formed
the two edges of the wound.


_Of the Aponeuroses of Insertion._

We have divided into three species the aponeuroses of insertion.


_Aponeuroses of Insertion with a Broad Surface._

They are very numerous. Sometimes they arise from the expansion of
a tendon, as we see in those of the anterior rectus of the thigh;
sometimes, as in the masseter, they derive their origin immediately
from the bones. Sometimes it is on one side only that the insertion is
made; at others it is on both at the same time, and then they appear
like partitions placed between the fleshy fasciæ, which they serve at
the same time to separate and unite, as we observe in the muscles that
arise from each of the condyles of the humerus.

These aponeuroses always receive in a very oblique direction the
insertion of the fleshy fibres. Their mutual adhesion is intimate; I
shall speak of it in treating of the tendons.

They have the great advantage of multiplying prodigiously the points
of insertion, without requiring great osseous surfaces. The width
of the whole of the temporal fossa would not be sufficient for the
masseter, if it was inserted by separate fibres. By means of the
aponeurotic partitions which receive its fibres and are afterwards
fixed in the bone, its insertion is concentrated upon one of the edges
of the zygomatic arch. Thus in general, all the very strong muscles,
whose fibres are consequently very numerous, are crossed by similar
aponeuroses, as the deltoid, the pterygoids, &c. are a proof.

Almost all these aponeuroses are exactly like the tendons; many
are continuous with them and then their fibres remain in the same
direction. In general, it is a character of these aponeuroses not to
have their fibres crossed in different directions, like those of the
aponeuroses of covering; the reason of it is plain; the fleshy fibres
to which they give attachment being all nearly in one direction, or at
least not crossing, it is necessary that these should be like them as
they are continuous with them.

I have made an experiment which shows very evidently the identity of
the tendons with these aponeuroses; it consists in macerating for
some days a tendon; it then becomes supple; its fibres separate; by
stretching in the direction of its width, it forms a kind of membrane
which it would be impossible to distinguish from a true aponeurosis.


_Aponeuroses of Insertion in the form of an Arch._

They are much more rare than the preceding. When a great vessel passes
under a muscle, nature employs this means, so as not to interrupt
the insertion of the fleshy fibres. The diaphragm for the aorta, the
solæus for the tibial artery, exhibit an arrangement of this kind.
The insertion is made on the convexity, and the passage of the vessel
under the concavity of the arch, both extremities of which are fixed
in the bone. It has been thought for a long time that the arteries
could be compressed under these arches; and hence the explanation of
popliteal aneurisms, of apoplexy by the reflux towards the head of the
blood interrupted in the aorta, &c. But it is very evident that by
contracting, the fleshy fibres would enlarge the passage, instead of
contracting it, since the necessary effect of these contractions is to
enlarge in all directions the aponeurotic curve, an effect which would
be directly opposite, if their insertion was made at the concavity.
These aponeuroses are strongly interlaced and very resisting.


_Aponeuroses of Insertion with Separate Fibres._

They are a collection of an infinite number of small fibrous bodies
wholly distinct from each other, which seem to be detached from the
periosteum, as the threads of velvet go off from their common woof.
Each is continuous with a fleshy fibre; so that when by maceration we
remove all those fibres, these small bodies become floating and are
seen perfectly well, especially when the periosteum which has been
detached is plunged into water.

It is evident that this mode of insertion on the part of the muscles
requires always broad osseous surfaces, since each fibre has a place of
its own; we have an example of it in the superior part of the iliacus,
of the anterior tibialis, of the temporal, &c. If all the muscles were
inserted in this manner, ten times more surface in the skeleton would
not be sufficient to receive them.


ARTICLE NINTH.

OF THE TENDONS.

The tendons are a kind of fibrous cords, intermediate to the muscles
and the bones, transmitting to the second the motion of the first, and
performing in this function a part wholly passive.


I. _Form of the Tendons._

Usually situated at the extremities of the fleshy fascia, they
sometimes however occupy the middle, as we see in the digastric
muscle; they are almost always found at the most moveable extremity,
that which serves for support having aponeuroses for insertion, as we
see especially on the fore-arm and the leg, of which all the muscles
inserted above by broad osseous or aponeurotic surfaces, terminate
below by a more or less slender tendon. From this arrangement result,
1st, little thickness at the extremity of the limbs, and consequently
facility in their motions; 2d, great resistance to external pressures
very frequent in this place, the fibrous texture being, as we have
said, very resisting; 3d, the concentration of the whole effort of a
muscle oftentimes very thick upon a very narrow osseous surface, and
for the same reason the extent and force of the motions of the bone.

The tendinous forms are usually round, no doubt because they are those
in which, with the least size the greatest quantity of matter enters.
Sometimes however as in the tendons of the extensors of the leg and the
fore-arm, they are flat.

Sometimes bifurcated or divided into many secondary elongations, the
tendons are inserted into the bones, or receive fleshy fibres in two or
many different points. All are covered by a loose texture which allows
them to slide easily upon each other, or upon the neighbouring parts.
Sometimes this texture is wanting, and then the synovial capsules
surround them to favour their motions. Their extremity, in which the
fleshy fibres are fixed, receives these fibres differently. Sometimes
it is to one side only that they are attached; hence the semi-penniform
muscles; at other times it is to both sides at the same time; this
constitutes the penniform. Frequently the tendon is buried so deep in
them, that it cannot be laid bare, but by dividing them longitudinally.

The adhesion is very great between the fleshy and tendinous fibre.
Yet by macerating them a long time or subjecting them to ebullition,
they gradually separate from each other. I have observed that in young
subjects the union was much less intimate; thus by scraping at this age
the tendon with a scalpel, we remove from it the muscle, without its
ever appearing again; the polish is almost the same where the fibres
are inserted, as where they are naturally wanting. The extremity of the
tendon fixed to the bone, intermixes with the periosteum as it usually
expands; so that it is with this membrane, and not with the bone
itself, that the tendon makes part, because in fact it is the membrane
which is of the same nature; thus if it finds an analogous membrane,
it fixes to it equally, as we see in the insertion of the straight and
oblique muscles in the sclerotica, of the ischio and bulbo-cavernous
ones in the membrane of the corpus cavernosum. In general the tendons
never unite but to fibrous membranes; the serous, the mucous, every
organ in a word, foreign to the fibrous system, is also heterogeneous
to them.


II. _Organization of the Tendons._

The fibrous texture is extremely compact in the tendons; many appear
homogeneous at first view; but by examining them with care, we soon
distinguish fibres, connected by a small quantity of compact cellular
texture. Ebullition renders these fibres very evident; when we plunge
suddenly the tendon into boiling water at the place where it has
been cut transversely, they become a little thicker at this divided
extremity, swell as it were and are thus very evident. At the place
where they expand to form an aponeurosis or to unite to the periosteum,
these fibres can be distinctly seen without any preparation. On the
other hand, as we can always, as I have said, reduce artificially a
macerated tendon to an aponeurosis, and as in this state of maceration,
soft and loose, it yields to all the forms we wish to give it, it is
an excellent means of distinguishing the tendinous fibres. In this
experiment so easily repeated, I have never seen the spiral form of the
tendinous cylinders, of which some modern authors have spoken. These
fibres are in the tendon as at the place where they separate to form an
aponeurosis, that is to say in a right line.

Blood scarcely enters the vascular system of the tendons; but in some
inflammations, they are wholly penetrated by it. I have seen one of
those of the extensors, laid bare in a whitlow, so red, that it had
the appearance of a phlegmon. Yet I observed that this colour was not,
as in many other inflamed organs, dependant on the small red striæ,
an indication that the exhalants are filled with blood; but it was
uniform, as for example a body dyed red. In general, it appears that
of the whole fibrous system, it is the tendons which have the least
energetic degree of vitality, and the most obscure vital forces. By
dissecting them in a living animal I have found that they have exactly
the same arrangement as in the dead body; the white fluids that
penetrate them do not flow under the scalpel; they are dry and can be
removed by layers. They appear to have a very low temperature; for,
in general, the degree of heat of an organ is in proportion to the
quantity of blood vessels it receives.

If in the body they are at the general temperature, it is only because
the neighbouring organs communicate theirs to them. Caloric is not
disengaged in their texture.

The tendons have a remarkable affinity to gelatine and even the
phosphate of lime; where they slide upon a bone, and where they suffer
a great friction, they exhibit a hardness which authors attribute to
pressure, by comparing it to the callous hardening of the sole of the
feet, but which is owing evidently to an exhalation in the tendinous
texture of the two preceding substances, an exhalation which the motion
produces and from which arises a real ossification.

It is thus as we have said, that the different sesamoid bones are
formed, and the patella in particular, a bone the texture of which
evidently differs from that of the others, because in the midst of the
gelatine and of the phosphate of lime that penetrate it, there remains
in it a part of fibrous texture which is not seized upon by these
substances, and which is so considerable that its kind of vitality and
organization belong as much and more to that of the fibrous system,
than to that of the osseous.

Besides, if we detach the patella or any sesamoid bone, leaving with it
a tendinous portion of each side, and expose them to the action of an
acid, this calcareous substance is removed, the fibres of the bone are
exposed, and we see that they are a continuation of those of the tendon
which is then softened.

The muscles of organic life, and most of those which in animal life
form the sphincters, are destitute of tendons. This white texture,
those silver cords that are found in the heart, have not the nature of
the tendons of the limbs.


ARTICLE TENTH.

OF THE LIGAMENTS.

We have divided the ligaments into those with regular fasciæ, and into
those with irregular ones.


I. _Ligaments with Regular Fasciæ._

They are met with in general in almost all the moveable articulations,
and especially upon their sides; hence the name of lateral ligaments
by which most of them are designated. Some however are foreign to the
articulations, as we see an example in that extending from the coracoid
to the acromion process, in those which complete the different osseous
fissures, the orbitary for example.

These organs form fasciæ sometimes round, sometimes flat, fixed to, or
rather intermixed with the periosteum by their two extremities, easily
removed with it in childhood, holding to the bone in the adult by the
ossification of the internal layers of this membrane.

Their analogy with the tendons is very striking; the external
difference is that they hold to the periosteum at both sides, whilst on
one side the tendons are contiguous with the muscles. We see sometimes
that the same organ is a tendon at one age, and a ligament at another.
This arrangement is remarkable in the inferior ligament of the patella.
Yet there are, as we have remarked, differences of composition between
them. All result from an assemblage of fibres parallel in the middle,
diverging at the extremities, united by a cellular texture more loose
than that of the tendons, and which often contains some fatty flakes.
This substance is sometimes so abundant in them, that they have an
appearance analogous to that of the fatty muscles; I have made this
observation on the ligaments of the knee, in a subject elsewhere very
thin.

There are some blood vessels in the ligaments. In certain diseases
of the articulations, their vascular system is developed in a very
remarkable manner, and they are penetrated by a great quantity of
blood; no nerve is discoverable in them.

Sometimes the ligamentary texture is changed into a matter like lard,
in which every kind of fibre disappears, which rarely returns to
its primitive state, and which is met with almost always in organic
affections, fatal to the patient.

The ligaments unite strongly the osseous surfaces, prevent their
displacement, and yet allow easy motions; a double function which they
perform in virtue of a double property, of their resistance on the
one part, of their softness and flexibility on the other; sometimes
externally, they serve for some muscular insertions.


II. _Of Ligaments with Irregular Fasciæ._

These are irregular fibres scattered here and there upon the osseous
surfaces, without any order, intermixed in different directions between
the sacrum and the ilium, upon the summit of the acromion, &c. We see
many of these fibres, around some of the moveable articulations; much
cellular texture separates them. They cannot offer any general views.

In general, the fibrous system is not as regularly organized in the
ligaments as it is in the tendons, as the muscular system is in the
muscles, &c. In the ligaments even with regular fasciæ, we often see
fibres going in different directions, separating from the principal
fascia, without any very distinct order.




FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


The fibro-cartilaginous system is composed of different organs which
anatomists have sometimes placed among the cartilages, and sometimes
among the ligaments, because they in fact partake of the nature of
both. I make a system of them between the two preceding ones, a
knowledge of which will facilitate the understanding of this.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE FORMS OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

We may divide the fibro-cartilaginous organs into three classes.

The first comprehends those which are found in the ears, the alæ of
the nose, the trachea, the eye-lids, &c. They are very delicate, like
membranes, sometimes arranged in an uniform manner, sometimes bent in
various directions. As neither their position nor functions have any
thing in common, we cannot give them a denomination derived from their
forms. We may designate these substances by the name of membranous
fibro-cartilages. Besides it is not only in its form, but also in its
nature, that this class differs from the others, as we shall see.

In the second class are ranked the inter-articular substances, which
occupy the interstices of the moveable articulations, whether they
are in part loose in the cavity, like those of the knee, of the lower
jaw, &c. and go in different directions according to the motions, or
whether, like that of the body of the vertebræ, they are fixed in a
solid, though moveable manner, on the osseous surfaces. These organs
are in general thicker than the preceding, very various in their form,
representing commonly a kind of laminæ, sometimes perforated through
the middle in the articular cavities, arranged in very thick fasciæ,
and formed like the body of the vertebræ in the vertebral column. We
may designate them under the name of articular fibro-cartilages.

I refer to the third class certain portions of the periosteum in which
the nature of this membrane is entirely changed, becomes penetrated
with gelatine and exhibits an aspect at first analogous to that of
the cartilages, but in which it is easy however to distinguish the
fibrous texture. These portions are found in the tendinous sheaths, in
which they facilitate the sliding of the tendons, and defend the bones
from their impression. They may be called the fibro-cartilages of the
tendinous sheaths.

These three classes of fibro-cartilages, though very analogous, have
not exactly the same structure, the same vital properties, nor the
same life; so that the system they form is not as homogeneous in its
different divisions, as the osseous, animal muscular systems, &c.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization of the Fibro-Cartilaginous
System._

The texture peculiar to the organization of the fibro-cartilaginous
system is composed, as its name indicates, of a fibrous substance, more
than of a true cartilage.

The fibrous substance is as the base of the organ. We distinguish this
base very plainly in the fibro-cartilages of the tendinous grooves and
of the articulations, in those especially of the body of the vertebræ;
it is much less apparent in the membranous fibro-cartilages. Its
fibres are sometimes interlaced, sometimes parallel. In general its
nature is exactly the same as in the fibrous system, hard, resisting,
dense and compact, hence the very great force which the organs of
this system have; hence, 1st, the solidity with which the vertebræ
are kept together; 2d, the difficulty of rupturing, or tearing the
fibro-cartilages of the knee, the jaw, the clavicle, &c.; 3d, the
resistance which that of the radius makes to the inferior luxations of
this bone, luxations which in the forced pronations of this bone have
great tendency to take place, and which cannot without the rupture of
this fibro-cartilage. I have seen an example of a similar displacement
not reduced; the fibro-cartilage was entirely gone; 4th, by bending
the true cartilages they break nearly like a radish; these organs
on the contrary bend in all directions, and resist the agents that
stretch them; 5th, we see men imprudently raise children by their
ears, the fibro-cartilages of which easily support the weight of the
whole body. I am persuaded that those of the nose would do the same.
6th. We know that in the aneurisms of the pectoral or the abdominal
aorta, the bodies even of the vertebræ are much more quickly worn, and
consequently resist less than the substances which unite them.

The cartilaginous portion appears to be interposed between the fibres,
the interstices of which it fills. It is very evident especially in
the articular fibro-cartilages and in those of the grooves; it is
from it that they borrow the white colour that characterizes them,
the inorganic appearance that a section of them exhibits in many
places, and the elasticity which they have. Subjected to ebullition,
the articular fibro-cartilages, like those of the tendinous grooves,
become yellow, transparent, melt into gelatine, though with much more
difficulty than the true cartilages.

As to the membranous fibro-cartilages of the ear, the nose, the
trachea, the epiglottis and the eye-lids, their composition appears to
be very different. The action of boiling water does not reduce them to
a gelatinous state, at least in an evident manner; they remain white,
soften a little, appear wholly different from a fibrous organ or the
other fibro-cartilaginous organs boiled, which dissolve after becoming
yellow and semi-transparent. The inspection of the ears of animals
that are brought on our tables clearly proves this; I have frequently
confirmed it in my experiments. I know but few of the textures in the
economy that resemble this. When it has been boiled a little while, the
kind of periosteum which surrounds it is detached from it; it breaks
itself and cracks in many places; the rings of the trachea especially
exhibit an example of this last phenomenon.

Exposed for some days to maceration, this texture, from being white,
becomes of a very evident red. This colour is deeper than that which
the cartilages of ossification acquire in water; does it arise from
the same causes? I know not.

When the intervertebral fibro-cartilages are macerated, their fibrous
laminæ take also their reddish tinge, which I have not seen in the
other articular fibro-cartilages, especially in those of the knee.

Drying makes the membranous fibro-cartilages hard and brittle; they do
not take then the yellow colour of the dried tendons and aponeuroses;
they have a peculiar appearance.

Subjected to this experiment, the intervertebral substances acquire
a remarkable transparency, different also from that of the fibrous
system, without the yellowish tinge. In the first days of their
maceration, these substances, when they have been entirely detached
from the vertebræ, swell, rise up and form a kind of hollow cone, the
summit of which is made by the middle which especially swells, and the
base by the circumference which remains nearly in the natural state.

Most of the fibro-cartilages want in general the perichondrium; this
is evident in those of the tendinous grooves in which the bone on one
side and the synovial membrane on the other cover the organ, in those
of the articulations which this membrane surrounds on both sides, and
in those of the vertebræ to which only the anterior and posterior
vertebral ligaments correspond. As to the membranous fibro-cartilages,
there is upon them a very distinct fibrous texture; it is thick,
closely united to the peculiar texture of the organ, easily seen by
maceration, which whitens it in an evident manner, and which thus makes
it wholly different from the fibro-cartilaginous texture which is in
the middle. By cutting a fibro-cartilage of the ear, the nose, that of
the epiglottis, &c. after they have remained in water, this fact is
made very clear, especially during the period in which they have the
redness that I have pointed out.

The fibro-cartilaginous system appears to have nearly the same
relations with the digestive juices, as the fibrous and cartilaginous
systems, of the nature of which it partakes; it is altered with
difficulty by those juices in a crude state. Boiling, by softening,
makes it yield more to their action; it becomes then more digestible.
In general, it gives an aliment less proper for nutrition, than that
furnished by many other systems.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Fibro-cartilaginous
System._

The common organs of the fibro-cartilages are not very conspicuous; the
cellular texture is in small quantity, and so compact as hardly to be
distinguished; maceration however renders it apparent.

But little blood enters their vascular system in the ordinary state;
I convinced myself of this by dissecting an animal killed for the
purpose by asphyxia, a disease in which the blood accumulating in
the capillaries intermediate to the arteries and the veins, towards
the head especially, renders these capillaries very evident; but in
inflammation, which is however rare in the fibro-cartilages, they are
very much injected. We can trace no nerves in them.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


I. _Physical Properties._

Elasticity belongs essentially to this system. This property is very
evident, 1st, in the fibro-cartilages of the ears, when we bend them;
2d, in those of the nose, when twisted in various directions; 3d, in
those of the trachea, when we compress them, or after having cut them
longitudinally, we separate the edges of the division, as is done in
tracheotomy, when the object is the extraction of a foreign body. It
performs an important use in the kind of vibration which is made in
the first in the perception of sounds, in the second in the production
of the voice; 4th, it is in virtue of their elasticity, that the
articular fibro-cartilages serve as a kind of cushions which favour,
by contracting and expanding, the motion of the osseous surfaces to
which they correspond; 5th, that those of the vertebræ in particular,
flattened during the day, re-act during rest, and thus make the
stature in the morning something more than it is in the evening; 6th,
finally in the sliding of the tendons upon their fibro-cartilages, the
elasticity of these last favours the motion in an evident manner.

This elasticity of the fibro-cartilages is united to a remarkable
suppleness; they bend in all directions without breaking. By the first
property they resemble especially the cartilaginous system; by the
second they approximate the fibrous. It is not astonishing that being
intermediate to these two systems in their texture, they should be so
also in their properties.


II. _Properties of Texture._

Extensibility is very often brought into action in the
fibro-cartilaginous system. I have seen a polypus that had so dilated
the anterior openings and consequently the fibro-cartilages of the
nostrils, that their diameter was at least treble. The external and
cartilaginous extremity of the meatus auditorius often exhibits from
the same cause, an analogous distension. In the various twistings of
the vertebral column, the portion of the fibro-cartilages corresponding
to the convexity of the curvatures, is evidently elongated, whilst
the opposite portion is contracted. This extensibility is moreover
subjected in many cases to the same law as in the fibrous system,
that is to say that it cannot be put into action but in a gradual and
insensible manner.

The contractility of texture is observed when, in the cases of which
I have spoken, the cause of distension disappears. Thus after the
extraction of the polypus mentioned, the nostril gradually resumes its
natural diameter. I have removed in a dog a tendon from its groove,
by cutting it at one extremity, and drawing it by the other, so as to
leave untouched and empty the sheath that contained it; this sheath
and the fibro-cartilage have gradually contracted and the cavity has
disappeared. In the carcinoma of the eye, in which the eye-lids were
not removed, the tarsi which become much elongated with these moveable
veils, gradually contract and resume their dimensions, after the
extirpation of the tumour which distended them. It is necessary however
to distinguish these phenomena from those which are the product of
elasticity; these last are prompt and sudden; the fibro-cartilage of
the ear, powerfully stretched, yields a little, and immediately goes
back again; the others, on the contrary, are characterized most often
by a remarkable slowness.


III. _Vital Properties._

All the vital properties appear to be but little developed in the
fibro-cartilages; there is no animal sensibility or contractility in
the natural state; the first appears however in inflammation. Organic
sensibility and insensible contractility are only found in the degree
necessary for nutrition. There is no sensible organic contractility.

This obscurity in the vital properties, gives to all the phenomena
of the life of the organs of which we are treating, a remarkable
slowness. I have observed that in making in the ears of a dog a
longitudinal section, and afterwards uniting the wound by a suture,
the skin, at the end of a few days, is entirely closed; but it is
only at the expiration of a much longer time, that the union of the
cartilage takes place below, as we can see by examining the parts after
the union of the integuments. I presume that the same thing happened
in the operation of tracheotomy formerly employed, in which the soft
parts forming at first the cicatrix, keep in contact the cartilaginous
semi-rings, which finally unite together.

It is also to this obscurity of the vital properties of the
fibro-cartilages, to their want of energy, that must undoubtedly be
referred the rareness of diseases of these organs. I know but few of
the organic systems in the economy, which are more rarely affected than
that of the fibro-cartilages of the nose, of the ears, the trachea, &c.
Gangrene attacks them with difficulty; they are scarcely altered by it,
whilst the soft parts which surround them are all already black. We
know but little of the kind of fluid they form in their suppuration.
The formation of pus appears to be even very rare in them, owing to
their want of vital activity.

As these organs are hardly ever diseased, we can with difficulty know
their sympathies; I am unable to cite an example of them.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


I. _State of this System in the first age._

In the first periods of existence, the articular fibro-cartilages are
much developed, which appears to be the effect of the size of the
articulations at this period. In fact, as the extremities of the bones
are larger in proportion, whilst they are cartilaginous, than when they
are in the osseous state, the articulations are also proportionally
larger, and the organs they contain more developed.

The fibro-cartilages of the grooves, which are found almost all, as
we know, situated at the extremities of the long bones, are not, in
the first age distinct from the cartilages of ossification, which then
form these extremities. Confounded with them, they exhibit no line of
demarcation when we cut the lines at that place. This state continues
until complete ossification; then the fibro-cartilages of the grooves
remain insulated like the cartilages of the osseous extremities.

The interposed gelatinous portion appears to predominate, in childhood,
over the fibrous portion in the articular fibro-cartilages and in those
of the grooves. It is remarkable in the intervertebral substances,
in which this kind of mucilage which occupies the centre, is as to
quantity in the inverse ratio of the age, and in which the fibres are
also more developed. On the pubis, the whole is almost homogeneous in
the fœtus; the transverse fibres do not become very apparent till a
more advanced age. The articulations of the knee, the jaw, &c. have
in their fibro-cartilages, the same arrangement. Ebullition extracts
from them then a much greater quantity of gelatine; they have more the
smooth appearance of the cartilages.

The membranous fibro-cartilages are in general developed early, those
of the ear, the eyes and the nose especially. We see them very evident
in the fœtus. I have observed in two acephalous infants, that, like
all the other parts of the face, they were of a remarkable size, and
much greater than that of the ordinary state. Besides, the whole
fibro-cartilaginous system is, in the fœtus, extremely soft, supple and
unresisting.


II. _State of the Fibro-Cartilaginous System in the after ages._

This system becomes stronger as we advance in age; in old age, it
becomes hard and yields with difficulty from the peculiar nature of
its nutritive substances. It is to this circumstance that must be
attributed, 1st, the stiffness and inflexibility of the vertebral
column, whose fibro-cartilages keep all the pieces in a kind of
immobility; 2d, a part of the difficulties which an old person
experiences in hearing sounds, the concha not being able to vibrate
and reflect them as well as before; 3d, the less susceptibility of his
nostrils to dilate, the fibro-cartilages yielding less to the muscular
effort, which is besides also less; 4th, the difficulties of the
sliding of the tendons, their grooves being much less supple.

The fibro-cartilages have in general much less tendency to ossify in
old age, than the cartilages properly so called. I never saw this
phenomenon in the membranous ones; perhaps it arises from their
peculiar texture, and even the difference of the principles which go to
their composition, and from the small quantity of gelatine that enters
into them. Among the articular, there are scarcely any but those of
the vertebræ, which are sometimes entered by the phosphate of lime;
this is however rare. Those of the grooves are like the cartilages of
the moveable articulations, they constantly keep their nature; only
in extreme old age, their thickness appears to diminish a little by
the ossification of their laminæ which correspond to the bone, which
besides is not very evident.




MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


The general muscular system very evidently forms two great divisions,
differing essentially from each other, by the vital forces that animate
them, by their external forms, by their mode of organization, and
especially by the parts they perform, the one in animal life, and
the other in organic. We shall not then consider them together. Let
us begin by the examination of the muscles of animal life; these are
spread out in great number in the human body. No system as a whole, is
of more considerable size; no one occupies more space in the economy.
Besides the numerous regions that the muscles fill, they are generally
spread out under the skin, and partake, as it were, of the functions
of this organ, protect like it the subjacent parts, like it bear with
impunity the action of external bodies, and can even be divided in a
more or less considerable extent, without the general functions of
life suffering from it; which renders them very fit to defend the
deep-seated organs, whose lesion would be very injurious.


ARTICLE FIRST.

_Of the Forms of the Muscular System of Animal Life._

From their external forms, the muscles may be divided, like the bones,
into long, broad and short. Their arrangement varies according to
these three general forms.


I. _Forms of the Long Muscles._

The long muscles occupy in general the limbs, to the conformation
of which theirs is accommodated. Separated from the skin by the
aponeuroses, from the bone by the periosteum, they are situated in a
sort of fibrous gutter, which retains them powerfully, and in which
they are arranged in layers more or less numerous, the deep ones are
confined in their place by the superficial ones, which, in their turn,
have the aponeuroses to support them. These last are very long; they
commonly belong to the motions of three or four bones and even more,
examples of which we have in the sartorius, the semi-tendinosus and
membranosus, the biceps, the flexors and the extensors. As they become
deeper, they are also shorter and generally destined to the motions of
two bones only, as the adductors, the pectineus, &c. are a proof.

Cellular layers separate them; they are loose where great motions take
place, more compact where these motions are less, very thick where
vessels and nerves go between the muscular fasciculi. Often spaces more
or less considerable, filled with cellular texture, separate these
fasciculi from each other. We divide the long muscles into simple and
compound. They are simple when a single fasciculus forms them, compound
when they arise from the union of many. These fasciculi are found then
in two different manners; sometimes in fact its division is at the top
of the muscle, as we see in the brachial and femoral biceps; sometimes
it is at the inferior part, at the most moveable side that this
division is met with, as in the flexor and extensor muscles of the leg
and the fore-arm.

The long muscles often separate from each other, are sometimes held
together by means of aponeuroses, which confound a more or less
considerable portion of two, three and even four of these neighbouring
organs. The origin of the muscles of the internal and external
tuberosities of the humerus exhibits this arrangement, whence results
an essential advantage in the general motions of the limb. Then in fact
the contraction of each muscle serves, both to cause a motion below in
the moveable part to which it is attached, and to strengthen above the
fixed point of the neighbouring muscles which contract at the same time
with it.

Every long muscle is in general thicker in its middle than at its
extremities, a form which arises from the manner of the insertion of
the fleshy fibres, which arising above and terminating below, some
successively below others, are so much the less numerous as we approach
nearer each extremity, whilst in the middle they are all found in
juxta-position. The anterior rectus, the long supinator, the external
radial muscles, &c. have manifestly this arrangement.

There is a particular kind of long muscles, which has no analogy but
in external appearance with that of the muscles of the limbs. They
are those that are embedded in front and especially behind the spine.
Though they appear simple at first view, these muscles have as many
distinct fasciculi as there are vertebræ. The transversalis colli, the
sacro-lumbalis, the longus colli, &c. represent very well an elongated
fasciculus like the sartorius, the anterior rectus of the thigh, &c.;
but the structure of this fasciculus has nothing in common with that of
these muscles; it is a series of small fasciculi, which have each their
distinct origin and termination, and which appear to be confounded into
one muscle only because they are in juxta-position.


II. _Forms of the Broad Muscles._

The broad muscles occupy in general the parietes of the cavities of the
animal economy, those of the thorax and abdomen especially. They form
in part, these parietes, defend the internal organs, and at the same
time by their motions assist their functions.

Their thickness is not great; most of them appear like muscular
membranes, sometimes arranged in layers, as in the abdomen, sometimes
covering the long muscles, as on the back; they are in the first case,
much more extensive superficially than deeper seated.

Whenever abroad muscle arises and terminates on one of the great
cavities, it preserves everywhere nearly its breadth, because it has a
large surface for its insertion. But if from a cavity it goes to a long
bone, or to a small apophysis, then its fibres gradually approximate;
it loses its breadth, increases in thickness, and terminates in an
angle which is succeeded by a tendon, which concentrates into a
very small space fibres widely scattered on the side of the cavity.
The great dorsal and pectoral muscles present us an example of this
arrangement, which is met with also in the iliacus, in the glutæi
medius and minimus. The broad muscles of the pectoral cavity have a
peculiar arrangement which the ribs require; their origin takes place
by serrated points fixed to these bones, and separated by spaces
between them.

The broad muscles are most often simple; many rarely unite to form
compound ones. Different cellular layers separate them, like the long
muscles; but they are hardly ever like them covered by aponeuroses; the
greatest number is merely subjacent to the integuments; the reason is
that their form naturally protects them from these displacements, of
which we have spoken in the article on aponeuroses, and which, without
these membranes, would be so frequent in the long muscles. I do not
know that the cramp has ever been observed in those of which we are
treating. When the abdominal muscles are laid bare by incisions made
through the integuments of a living animal, I have observed, that in
contracting, the bulk of each preserves the same place.


III. _Forms of the Short Muscles._

The short muscles are those in which the three dimensions are nearly
equal, having a thickness in proportion to their width and their
length. They are found in general in the places, where is required on
the one hand much power, and on the other small extent of motion; thus
around the temporo-maxillary articulation the masseter and pterygoids,
around the ischio-femoral the quadratus the gemini the obturators, &c.
around the scapulo-humeral the supra-spinalis and the teres minor,
in the hand the muscles of the palmar eminences, in the foot various
fleshy fasciculi, in the vertebral column the interspinal, in the head
the small and great anterior, posterior and lateral recti, exhibit
more or less regularly the form of which we are treating, and answer
the double object that I have indicated, on the one hand by the very
considerable number and on the other by the shortness of their fibres.

The short muscles are, more often than the broad, united to each
other, either in their origin or termination, as we see in the foot
and the hand. Sometimes they are of a triangular form, as in these two
parts; sometimes they approach to the form of a cube, of which there
is an example in the masseter and pterygoid muscles. In general they
are rarely covered by aponeuroses, undoubtedly because the shortness
of their fibres prevents them from being liable in a great degree to
considerable displacements.

Besides, the division of the muscles into long, broad and short,
is, like that of the bones, subject to an infinite number of
modifications. In fact many of these organs have mixed characters; thus
the sub-scapularis and the infra-spinalis have a form intermediate to
the broad and short one; thus the cruræus, the gemelli of the leg, &c.
cannot be considered precisely long or broad muscles. Nature varies,
according to the functions of the organs, the conformation of the
agents of their motions, and we can only establish approximations in
our anatomical divisions.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

The part peculiar to a muscle is what is commonly called the muscular
fibre; the vessels, the nerves, the exhalants, the absorbents and the
cellular texture, which is very abundant around this fibre, form its
common parts.


I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization of the Muscular System of
Animal Life._

The muscular fibre is red, soft, of an uniform size in the great
and small muscles, sometimes disposed in very evident fasciculi and
separated from each other by remarkable grooves, as in the gluteus
maximus, the deltoid, &c. sometimes more equally in juxta-position, as
in most of the broad muscles, always united to many others of the same
nature like it, easily by this union distinguished by the naked eye,
but eluding microscopic researches when we wish to examine it in a
separate manner, so great is its tenuity. Notwithstanding this extreme
tenuity, an infinite number of researches have been made during the
last age, to determine with precision the size of this fibre. On this
point may be read the result of the labours of Leuwenhoek, Muysk, &c. I
shall not give here this result, because science can draw nothing from
it, and because we cannot rely upon its accuracy; of what importance
moreover is the precise size of the muscular fibre? its knowledge would
add nothing to our physiological views upon the motion of the muscles.

Every muscular fibre runs its course without bifurcating or dividing
in any manner, though many have thought otherwise; it is found only
in juxta-position to those which are near it, and not intermixed, as
often happens in the fibrous system; an arrangement that was rendered
necessary by the insulated motions it performs; for the general
contraction of a muscle is the union of many partial contractions,
wholly distinct and independent of each other.

The length of the fleshy fibres varies very much. If we examine in
general the mass which they form by their union, we observe that this
mass has sometimes much greater extent than the tendinous portion of
the muscle, as the biceps, the coraco-brachialis, the rectus internus
femoris, &c.; that sometimes its length is much less as in the small
plantar and palmar muscles, &c.; and that sometimes it is about equal,
as in the external radial, &c. If from the examination of the fleshy
mass, we pass to that of the separate fibres that compose it, we
see that the length of the first is rarely the same as that of the
second. There are hardly any but the sartorius and some analogous
muscles, whose fibres run the whole extent of the fleshy, mass; in
almost all the others, they are found obliquely arranged between two
aponeuroses, or between a tendon and an aponeurosis; so that though
each of them may be very short, as a whole they are very long, as we
observe in the anterior rectus of the thigh, the semi-membranosus, &c.
This arrangement may also arise from various tendinous intersections,
which cut at different distances the length of the fibres. In general,
the muscles which owe their length to long fibres, have great extent
and very little power of motion; whilst those with short fibres, but
multiplied so as to give great length as a whole, are remarkable for
an opposite character. And this is the reason: all the fibres being
equally large, whatever may be their length, have the same degree of
force; it is evident then that this force considered in a muscle as
a whole, is measured by the number of its fibres. On the other hand,
the longer a fibre is, the more it shortens in its contraction; then
by contracting, a muscle brings its attachments so much the nearer in
proportion as its fibres are longer.

All the fibres of the voluntary muscles are straight, those of the
sphincters excepted. They are either parallel as in the rhomboids, or
obliquely situated in relation to each other, as in the great pectoral.
Sometimes in the same muscle many sets cross each other in different
directions, as we see in the masseter; but this crossing is wholly
different from that of the involuntary muscles in which there is more
crossing of fibres, whilst here we see only fasciculi in different
directions, in juxta-position to each other.

I shall not speak here of the cylindrical form according to some, and
the globular one according to others, of the fleshy fibre; inspection
teaches us nothing upon this point; how then can we make that an object
of research and give an opinion upon it, which has no real foundation?
Let us say thus much of the intimate nature of this fibre, upon which
so much has been written. It is unknown to us, and all that has been
said upon its continuity with the vascular and nervous extremities,
upon its pretended cavity, upon the marrow, which according to some
filled it, &c. is only a collection of vague ideas, which nothing
positive confirms, and to which a methodical mind would not attend. Let
us begin to study nature where she begins to come under our senses. I
would compare the anatomical researches upon the intimate structure
of the organs, to the physiological researches upon the first causes
of the functions. In both we are without guides, without precise and
accurate data; why then give ourselves up to them?

All that we can know upon the nature of the muscular fibre, is that it
is peculiar, that it is not the same as that of the nerves, nor as that
of the vessels, nor as that of the tendons or the cellular texture; for
where there is identity of nature, there ought to be identity of vital
properties and of texture. Now we shall see that all these systems
differ essentially from each other in this point of view; there can
be between them no analogy in relation to their nature, whence the
properties are always derived.

The muscular texture is remarkable for its softness and small degree
of resistance. It is by this that it is essentially different from the
fibrous texture. It breaks with ease in the dead body. In the living,
this rupture is rare, because the contraction which exists in all the
violent efforts, gives it a density, by which it gains an enormous
increase of resistance, but which it loses when it is no longer in
a state of contraction. There are however examples of the rupture
of muscles; it is principally in the rectus abdominis and quadratus
lumborum that they take place. I have seen one in this last. Observe
that this muscle and all those placed between the ribs and the pelvis,
are much disposed, from their situation, to these ruptures. In fact,
when the pelvis and the thorax are carried in an opposite direction,
these muscles are so much the more violently stretched, as in these
motions all the superior part of the body forms with the thorax, a
great lever, which is moved in an opposite direction to another great
lever, which is formed by the pelvis and all the inferior parts; now
from their length, these levers are capable of receiving a very great
motion, of communicating it consequently to the abdominal muscles which
are stretched between the two, and which serve to unite them. Hence how
in a violent inclination to the right, the quadratus of the left side
can be torn, &c. Observe that but few of the muscles in the economy are
found between two levers so great, consequently are capable of being
so much distended, and especially of being so with a force greater
than that of their contraction; for every muscular rupture supposes
the excess of the external motion, which distends, over that of the
fleshy fibres which contract to oppose this distension. If the external
efforts were concentrated upon a single muscle, they would be able more
often to overcome the resistance; but almost always many partake of the
effort to support and the resistance to oppose.


_Composition of the Muscular Texture._

The muscular texture has been with chemists, a more particular object
of research than most of the other organized textures. They have
examined it under all its relations. I refer to their works, to that
of Fourcroy especially, for all which is not strictly relative to
the nature of this texture, for all which considers consequences not
applicable to physiology, which we can deduce from the knowledge of the
principles that enter into its composition.

Exposed to the action of the air, the muscular texture is affected in
two ways. 1st. It dries, if cut into thin slices, admitting of the
evaporation of the fluids it contains. Then its appearance is of a dull
brown; its fibres contract, it becomes thinner, hard and brittle. If
replunged into water within some days, even fifteen or thirty after its
drying, it resumes its primitive softness and form, and has a less deep
coloured tinge. The water that has been used for this softening is more
or less fetid, and similar to that of macerations. 2d. Exposed in too
great a mass to the air, the muscular texture does not dry, but becomes
putrid. Thus in making anatomical preparations by drying, care should
be taken to lessen the thickness of the fleshy parts, or to arrange
them so that the air can penetrate them everywhere. Putrefaction is
inevitable if the air is moist, if the evaporation of the fluids is
not quick enough to produce drying. When it becomes putrid, the muscle
assumes a green, livid colour; it exhales an offensive odour. Under the
influence of the same circumstances it becomes putrid much quicker than
the fibrous, the cartilaginous and the fibro-cartilaginous systems. The
odour that it exhales then is also very different from that of these
systems; a phosphoric light often escapes from it. A mass of putridity,
in which all the fibres have almost disappeared, takes the place of the
muscle, when putrefaction is advanced. This mass of putridity gradually
evaporates in part, and there remains a dark brown residue, which dries
and becomes hard and brittle, nearly like the muscle dried in the
ordinary state, though the appearance however may be very different.

Exposed to the action of water, the muscle undergoes different
phenomena, according as it is hot or cold. Cold water takes from it at
first its red colour, of which it appears to dissolve the principle. To
effect quickly this phenomenon, it is necessary to expose the flesh,
at first in thin layers, to the action of water that is often changed,
by placing a muscle for example under a fountain, in the current of a
river, or what is much better, by frequently expressing the water it
imbibes; for if we keep it in a vessel, its exterior only whitens a
little, and the interior preserves its colour. Water which has been
used to wash a muscle, looks like blood spread out in this fluid; it
contains the colouring matter, a little of the extractive substance,
gelatine, &c. I believe that of all the organs the muscle is that from
which we remove most easily its colour by artificial means. Ought we
to be astonished after this, if nature varies so evidently and so
frequently this colour by the phenomena of nutrition, as we soon shall
have occasion to remark? Kept in water at a moderate temperature,
the muscular texture remains for a long time without softening; it
finally does, and changes layer by layer into a kind of putridity
very different however from that which is formed in the open air, as
I have frequently observed in macerating the muscles in a cellar, the
temperature of which is uniform. At other times, instead of putrefying
thus, the muscle is changed, as Fourcroy has remarked, into a substance
like spermaceti; then its fibre is hard and solid. But all the muscles
when kept in water by no means exhibit this phenomenon. When it does
take place, very often a kind of reddish product, scattered here and
there on the surface of the muscle, and which is an evident effect of
decomposition, announces and afterwards accompanies this state, without
which also, it often takes place. Maceration in dissecting rooms
frequently exhibits this phenomenon.

When we have taken from the muscles their colouring substance by
repeated washings, there remains a white fibrous texture, from which
we can still extract albumen by ebullition, which rises in scum,
gelatine by suffering it to grow cold, extractive matter which has a
deep colour, by letting it settle, and some phosphoric salts. When
all these substances have disappeared, the residue of the muscle is
a fibrous substance, of a greyish colour, insoluble in warm water,
soluble in the weak acids, giving out much azote from the action of the
nitric acid, and presenting all the characters of the fibrin of the
blood. It appears, as Fourcroy has remarked, that this substance is
truly the nutritive substance of the muscle, that which, continually
exhaled and absorbed, contributes to its nutritive phenomena more
than all the others; it constitutes the essence of the muscle, it
especially characterizes it, as the phosphate of lime is the nutritive
characteristic matter of the bones. Is this substance formed in the
blood and carried from it to the muscle, or is it formed in the muscle
by nutrition, and thence carried to the blood? I know not. Whichever
may be the case, it appears to experience very great varieties in
its exhalation and absorption. The state of laxity, of cohesion, the
thousand various appearances of the muscular texture, appear to belong
in part to these varieties of proportion. Thus the phosphate of lime
or gelatine, diminished by nutrition, give to the bones softness or
brittleness.

It is in this fibrous and essential portion of the muscle, that
particularly resides the faculty of crisping by the action of caloric,
whether by plunging a muscle into boiling water, or exposing it to the
fire; for this crisping is as evident in the muscle deprived of its
colouring matter, its gelatine, its albumen, and even a portion of its
extractive substance as in the ordinary muscle. There is in general
a constant relation between the quantity of this fibrous substance
contained in the muscles, and the quantity that the blood contains of
it. In the strong, vigorous, sanguineous temperaments, as they are
called, the muscles are thick and much more fibrous. In all the slow
cachexiæ in which the blood is impoverished, the pulse small and feeble
and in which muscular nutrition has had time to share but little of the
fibrin of the blood, the muscles are small, weak, soft, &c. In general,
the muscles and the blood are always in constant relation, whilst other
systems often predominate and whilst this fluid seems to be in less
quantity in the economy.

Exposed for a long time to ebullition, as in common boiled meat, the
muscular texture, still united to the adjacent organs, and to its
common parts, gives, 1st, an albuminous scum which appears to arise
more from the lymph of the cells than from the muscle itself; 2d,
many fatty drops coming also especially from the cellular texture,
almost foreign consequently to the texture of the muscle, and which
swim on its surface; 3d, gelatine formed especially by the aponeurotic
intersections; 4th, an extractive substance which colours in part the
water in which it is boiled, gives it a peculiar taste and remains in
part adherent to the flesh to which it communicates a deep tinge wholly
different from that of raw flesh, a tinge which arises also from the
colouring matter of the muscle, and which moreover changes, when the
liquor cools, into a less deep and even a whitish tinge; 5th, various
salts which contribute much to the taste of the liquor, and the nature
of which chemists have ascertained. These are the natural phenomena of
the ebullition of the muscle.

The more extensive analysis of boiled flesh is not my province; but
what ought not to escape us here, are the phenomena of which the
fibre is the seat, whilst the preceding products are extracted,
whether from it, or the surrounding textures. These phenomena can
be referred to three periods. 1st. When the water is only tepid,
and even a little above the temperature of the body, it leaves the
muscular texture in the same state, or softens it a little. 2d. When
it approaches ebullition and begins to be covered with an albuminous
scum, the texture crisps, thickens and contracts and gives to the
muscle a density much greater than what is natural to it, and
augments considerably its resistance. I have observed that in this
state the muscles bear much greater weights than in a natural state.
They approximate, if we may so say, that remarkable density which
characterizes them when they contract in the living body, and which so
powerfully opposes their rupture. This condensation of the muscular
texture, which is prompt and sudden, increases till the period of
ebullition, when it is at its greatest height; it continues only for
a certain time. 3d. Gradually it diminishes, the fibres soften, and
are more easily torn than in their natural state. This softening, the
reverse of the hardening that precedes, is produced slowly and by
degrees. When arrived to a certain degree, the meat is rendered fit
for the table. Observe that then the muscle has not returned to the
state in which it was found before the hardening; among other phenomena
which distinguish it, the following is an essential one; it has lost
the power of crisping, of acquiring the horny hardness, from the action
of the concentrated acids, from alkohol or from caloric. In general it
becomes putrid more slowly. Its putrefaction does not give the same
odour. We know how much its taste differs. The principles it has lost
are undoubtedly one of the great causes of these differences.

When a muscle is exposed to an open fire, as in the roasting of meat,
the albumen is condensed, the gelatine melts, the fibrin filled with
juices softens, the extractive matter flows in part with the gelatine
and the salts held in solution; it is this that forms the gravy,
which is, as we know, very different from melted fat. The exterior of
the meat remains more dense than the interior; it is coloured by the
extractive substance. The interior loses in part its natural colour;
its consistence, its taste and its composition even change entirely.
The fibres, as in ebullition, lose the power of contracting and of
crisping from the action of strong stimuli and especially that of fire.

No part in the animal economy is more easily altered by the digestive
juices than the muscles. Almost all stomachs can bear boiled meat,
whilst many reject other organs when cooked. Carnivorous animals seize
upon the muscles of their prey in preference to the pectoral and
gastric viscera. Muscular flesh is with most people the most common
aliment, that with which they are never disgusted; it appears to be
the most nourishing of all those, which are afforded by the different
textures of animals; is it, as it has been said, because it contains
the most azote? Whatever may be the reason, the general part which the
muscular system takes in the digestion of all carnivorous animals, of
man especially, is remarkable. Yet all the parts of this system do
not appear to be equally agreeable to the taste of animals. It is,
for example, a singular fact, that those bodies which are brought to
our dissecting rooms, and which have been attacked by rats, are found
almost always exclusively gnawed in the muscles of the face.

Observe in regard to the use of the muscles in digestion, that it
is the portion of the fibrous system which adheres to them, and
forms, as it were, a part of them, I refer to the tendons, which
is the most easily altered by maceration, by ebullition and by the
digestive juices. Observe also that the great mass which the muscles
form in the body of all animals, of which they are more than one
third, presents to the carnivorous species ample materials for their
nutrition; thus nature, by multiplying these organs for the wants of
the individual which they move, seems to multiply them also for those
of the individuals which he is one day to nourish. In forming them in
each species, it labours for other species as well as for this. Who
knows if this general design, which observation finds in the series of
all animals, be not the cause of this remarkable predominance which
the muscles have over the other systems? Who knows, if nature would
not have diminished the powers of the animal mechanism which are so
numerous and so complicated in comparison with those of artificial
machines, who knows if she would not have simplified the means and
given the same results, if the motions of the animals had been the only
object of the formation of the muscles?

The sex has great influence on the quality of the flesh of animals. I
do not believe that any thing precise is known as to the nature of the
influence which the genital parts exert upon it; but the following are
remarkable facts upon this subject. The muscles of males are stronger
and better nourished, have more taste, resist boiling for a longer
time, are firmer, &c. Boiling water on the contrary alters quicker the
texture of females; it is more tender and gives to the liquor a less
strong taste. In the season of sexual intercourse, the muscular system
of the first has a peculiar odour, which often renders it disagreeable
even to the taste. It is an observation that is easily made in
quadrupeds, birds and fishes that are brought to our tables. Without
having as strong an odour, the flesh of the second becomes at this
period soft, flaccid and but little savoury.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Muscular System of Animal
Life._


_Cellular Texture._

The cellular texture is very abundant in the muscular system; I know
of no system that has a greater proportion of it. This texture forms
a very evident covering around each muscle. This covering is most
commonly loose, filled with fat, easily distended with air in emphysema
and serum in anasarca. At other times it is more dense, compact and
really arranged like a membrane. Such, for example, is the case with
that which covers the great oblique muscle of the abdomen, and the
dissection of which on this account, students at first find very
difficult. The other abdominal muscles, the trapezius, the serratus
major and the great dorsal exhibit also this arrangement. We might say
that in this way nature compensated for the aponeuroses, which are
wanting on the broad muscles of the trunk. Besides, this covering has
only a membranous appearance; it has nothing of its organization, it
disappears in the infiltration in which all the true membranes remain.

Besides this general covering of the muscle, each fasciculus has a less
covering, each fibre a still less one, and each smaller one a real
though almost insensible sheath. We can then represent the cellular
texture of the muscles as forming a series of coverings successively
decreasing. These coverings favour the motion of the fibres which they
separate, either by the serum of the cells, or by the fat they contain,
both fluids, by lubricating, allow them to slip more easily upon each
other. Frequently between these fibres, the cellular texture appears
to form a kind of cross pieces which go at right angles. We see this
arrangement especially in the proper extensor of the great toe, and
in the common extensor, the fleshy fasciculi of which are broad and
delicate when distended. In most of the thick muscles nothing similar
is observed.

The quantity of intermuscular cellular texture is remarkably variable.
In general, in all the broad muscles and in all the large, long
muscles, it is very abundant. It is less in proportion between the
fibres of those of the vertebral canals. Back of the neck, the splenii,
complexi, &c. have less of it than many others, especially in the
spaces that separate them.

Sometimes very considerable cellular elongations are found in the
middle of the muscles, and seem to divide them into two; such is that
which separates the clavicular portion of the great pectoral; this
has even sometimes embarrassed anatomists as to the division of these
organs.

The cellular texture in general fixes the muscles in their position;
the art of dissection proves it. The effusions of pus which often
perform the office of the scalpel, render also very evident this use,
which does not prevent the motion in all directions, that the great
extensibility of the cellular texture allows. The cellular texture
not only fixes the muscles to each other, but it also attaches each of
their fibres to neighbouring ones; it flattens them when they contract,
and elongates them when they are distended; if they are deprived of
it their motions become irregular and uncertain. I have many times
separated with a scalpel a muscle laid bare in a living animal, into
many small fasciculi; in afterwards making this muscle contract by
the irritation of the medulla, by means of a stilet introduced into
its canal, I have observed in an evident manner this irregularity of
motion. Cut longitudinally a muscle of an extremity from its superior
tendon to its inferior, so as to divide it into two or three entirely
distinct portions, irritate afterwards one of these portions, the
other or the two others will remain almost always at rest, whilst a
single irritated fibre in a sound muscle, puts in motion the whole of
that muscle. The section of the vessels and the nerves has no doubt a
little influence upon this phenomenon; but that of the cellular texture
certainly contributes to it also.

In dropsical subjects, the serum of the intermuscular texture is often
reddish; this phenomenon is owing to the action of this serum after
death upon the colouring substance. I believe that this can take place
during life only with great difficulty. The fat sometimes abounds in
this texture, to such a degree that the fleshy fibres disappear and
the fat only is visible; but oftentimes also the yellow appearance of
the muscular fibres, which is produced by the absence of the colouring
substance, is taken for this fatty state of the muscles. I have seen
the first state but rarely; the second is extremely frequent; we are
sometimes deceived at first view. But ebullition and combustion easily
prove, that the fat is wholly foreign to this want of colour of the
muscles examined in this state.


_Blood Vessels._

The arteries of the muscles are very apparent; they come from the
neighbouring trunks, penetrate the whole circumference of the organ,
more however towards its middle, than towards its extremities. They
run at first between the principal fasiculi, then divide and their
divisions go between the secondary fasciculi, subdivide and wind
between the fibres, and finally become capillaries and accompany
the small fibres, in which they deposit by the exhalant system the
nutritive matter. There are but few organs, which have, in proportion
to their size, more blood than the muscles.

The blood is essentially necessary to support their excitability, as we
shall see; it is that which colours the muscular texture, but not, as
it at first seems, by circulating in its texture. The circulating or
free portion contributes but little to it. It is the portion combined
with the muscular texture, that which contributes to its nutrition,
that gives it its colour; the following are proofs of it: 1st. The
fibres of the intestines are as much or more penetrated with the
circulating blood, than those of the muscles of animal life, and yet
their texture is evidently whitish, where these vessels are not found.
2d. Many animals with red and cold blood, frogs in particular, have
muscles almost white, and yet many red vessels run through this white
texture. 3d. I have observed that in animals destroyed by asphyxia,
the colouring substance does not change colour, no doubt because it is
slowly combined with the muscle by nutrition; that on the contrary, if
we cut a muscle of these animals in the last moments of life, whilst
the venous blood still circulates in the arterial system, this blood
flows out by black jets from the muscular arteries, the muscular
texture itself remaining red. This curious experiment, which I have
noticed in another work, is made by producing asphyxia in an animal by
compressing the trachea, or by intercepting the air in any other way in
this tube, whilst we examine the system of the muscles. When a muscle
has been exposed for some time to the contact of the air, to that of
oxygen especially, its red colour becomes evidently more brilliant.

The muscular vessels permit under certain circumstances the escape
of the blood they contain; hence different kinds of remarkable
hemorrhages, especially in scorbutic patients, sometimes in putrid
fevers, rarely or never in those diseases that are characterized by
an increase of vitality. Infiltrated with blood in preternatural
hemorrhages, particularly in false aneurisms, the muscles lose in
part their motion; this happens also in contusions, in which similar
infiltrations are observed.

The veins everywhere follow the arteries in the muscles; they have the
same distributions, and receive from the contractions of these organs
an essential assistance to their action. The throw of blood is more
powerful when the patient we have bled contracts his muscles, than
when he relaxes them; the fluid is as it were expressed, as from a wet
sponge which is squeezed. The arterial circulation does not exhibit
this phenomenon. I have observed that if we open the artery of the foot
of an animal, and by the irritation of the nerves, make the muscles of
the leg and thigh, through which this artery passes before reaching
the foot, contract powerfully, the throw of blood is not stronger than
during the relaxation.

I have many times injected the veins of the muscles of animal life with
ease, from the trunks towards the branches, which makes me believe,
notwithstanding what Haller has said, that in these organs, as in the
heart, the valves are less numerous than in many others. No doubt the
assistance the veins derive from their surrounding organs supplies the
place of these folds, or rather renders them useless, the weight of the
column of blood not making a great effort against the venous parietes.
The varices of the muscular veins are, as we know, extremely rare.
These veins are of two orders; one accompanies the arteries and follows
the same course, the others are spread superficially on the surface of
the organ, without having corresponding arteries.

There are absorbents and exhalants in the muscles; but we can with
difficulty trace the first, and the second cannot be perceived.


_Nerves._

Almost all the nerves of the muscles of animal life come from the
brain; the ganglions furnish a few of them; when this happens, as in
the neck, the pelvis, &c. besides the filaments coming from these
nervous centres, there are always filaments of cerebral nerves;
without this, these muscles would be involuntary. Few organs receive
more nerves in proportion to their size than the muscles. In general
the extensors appear to have rather fewer than the flexors; but the
difference is trifling. It is true that all the great nervous trunks
are in the direction of flexion, that in that of extension there are
only branches, as we see in the posterior part of the arm, of the
fore-arm, the vertebral column, &c. It is true also that this remark is
likewise applicable to the existence of the vessels, which are larger
and more numerous in the first than in the second direction; but this
greater number of vessels and nerves arises from this, that there are
many more flexors than extensors, that the first are stronger and have
more numerous fibres; so that each of these fibres hardly receives
more nervous or vascular filaments in one kind of muscles than in the
other. I think that there is but little foundation for what has been
said upon the difference of the strength of the fibres of the flexors
and of the extensors, upon the predominance of the first, &c. If these
are superior, it is either because they are more numerous, as in the
foot, the hand, &c. or more advantageously arranged, as in the trunk on
which the abdominal muscles act very far from the point of attachment
to bend the spine, whilst to extend it, the dorsal muscles exert their
action immediately at the side of this point of attachment, as also
in the neck, where the muscles that draw down the lower jaw and head
when this bone is fixed, are much further from the occipital condyles,
than the muscles which produce extension. Whatever may be the cause
of the superiority of the flexors, the fact cannot be doubted. 1st.
In hysterical convulsions, in those of infants, in all the spasmodic
motions in which the will has no part, the contractions take place much
more in the direction of flexion than in that of extension. 2d. In
old people the flexors finally become superior to the extensors; for
example, the fingers and toes are almost uniformly bent. 3d. In all the
motions, the power is always on the side of flexion.

The nerves enter the muscles of the extremities at a very acute angle,
because the nervous trunks are in the natural direction of these
organs. In the trunk, on the contrary, the nerves going from the spine,
the cervical especially, enter their muscles at almost a right angle or
one less evidently acute; this circumstance is of no importance. Each
branch in the fleshy fibres, is at first divided and then sub-divided
in their interstices, and afterwards lost in their texture. Does each
fibre receive a small nervous filament? We should be led to believe so
from this observation, that the principal branch being irritated, all
the fibres are put into action, no one remains inert. But on the other
hand, if we irritate one of them, all move also, which is certainly a
sympathetic phenomenon or one arising from the communication of the
cells.

Are the nerves deprived of their cellular coverings, and do they become
pulpy when they enter the muscles? Dissection has shewn me nothing like
it.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

There are but few systems in the economy in which the vital properties
and those of texture are found in so great and evident a degree as in
this. It is from the muscles that examples must be selected to give a
precise and accurate idea of these properties. The physical properties
on the contrary are slightly marked in them; a remarkable softness
characterizes them; there is no elastic power in their texture; there
is but very little resistance from this texture after death; it is
from vitality that it derives the power that characterizes it in its
functions.


I. _Properties of Texture. Extensibility._

Extensibility is manifested in the animal muscular system under many
circumstances. The different motions of our parts render this property
evident. Such is in fact the arrangement of the muscular system,
that one of its portions cannot contract, without the distension of
another. The thigh being strongly bent, the semi-membranosus, the
semi-tendinosus and the biceps are elongated. The arm being carried
out, the great pectoral is extended, being raised, the great dorsal and
the teres major are stretched. All the great flexions bring into action
this property in the extensors; all the extensions render it evident
in the flexors. A muscle which is stretched by its antagonist is in a
state purely passive; it is as it were for a moment abandoned by its
contractility, or rather it possesses it, without its being brought
into action; it is made to obey the motion that is communicated to
it. Observe that in these cases, the distension is confined to the
fleshy portion, and the tendon has no connexion with it; it remains
the same, whatever may be the distance, of the points of attachment,
for these points are nearer or more remote in the different extensions
to which the muscles are exposed; the longest muscles yield the
easiest. The sartorius, the posterior muscles of the thigh, &c.
exhibit this phenomenon in an evident manner; as their position is
accommodated to it. In general all the muscles remarkable for their
length are superficial, and go most commonly to two articulations,
sometimes even to three or four, as in the limbs. Now the number of
these articulations renders the space comprised between the two points
of attachment susceptible of very great variations, which the great
extensibility of these muscles allows. It may be understood from what
has been said above, that it is to the length of the fleshy fibres and
to the whole length of the muscle, that its degree of extensibility is
to be referred. Those in which many aponeuroses are intermixed, and
which derive in part from these membranes or from tendons their length,
possess less of this property. Hence why, in the same motions, muscles
of the same total length become more or less short, more or less
elongated in their fleshy portion. Observe however that when on the one
hand the tendinous portion predominates much, and on the other that it
is very delicate, it yields a little, as we see in the small plantar
and palmar muscles.

If from the natural state we pass to the morbid, we see the muscular
extensibility manifested in a much more evident degree. In the
face, the air accumulated in the mouth, swells it by elongating the
buccinators; the various tumours of this cavity, as the fungous and
sarcomatous ones, often distend the small facial muscles in a manner
which would astonish us, if we considered the naturally small extent
of these muscles which are trebled and even quadrupled. The muscles of
the eye-lids and the eye in the large carcinomas of that organ, those
of the anterior part of the neck in the great swellings of the thyroid
gland, the great pectoral in large aneurisms or in other tumours of
the axilla, the abdominal muscles in pregnancy, in dropsy, in the
various tumours of the abdomen, &c. the broad and superficial muscles
of the back from wens that are under them, present us these phenomena
of distension in a remarkable manner. The muscles of the extremities
are less subject to them, because on the one hand fewer causes develop
tumours beneath them, and because on the other the aponeuroses do not
yield so easily to these phenomena.


_Contractility of Texture._

The contractility of texture is carried to the highest point in the
muscles. These organs have a continual tendency to contraction,
especially when by being elongated, they have surpassed their natural
size. This tendency is independent of the action of the nerves, and of
the irritable property of the muscular texture. It is influenced by
life, but it is not entirely dependent on it; it depends essentially
on the structure of the muscles. The remarkable phenomenon of the
antagonist muscles results from it. The following is this phenomenon.

Each moveable point of the animal frame is always between two opposite
muscular forces, between those of flexion and extension, of elevation
and depression, of adduction and abduction, of rotation without and
rotation within, &c. This opposition is a condition essential to the
motions; for in order to perform one of them, it is necessary that the
moveable point should be in the opposite motion; in order to bend,
it is necessary that it should be first extended, and reciprocally.
The two opposite positions which a moveable part takes, are for it
alternately the point of departure and the point of arrival; the two
extremes of these positions are the two limits between which it can
move. Now between these limits there is a middle point; it is the point
of rest of the moveable part; when it is found there, the muscles are
in their natural state; when it passes it, some are extended, others
are contracted, and such is their arrangement, that the contraction
and extension which take place in an opposite direction, are exactly
in direct ratio. Hence, in the reciprocal influence that the muscles
exert upon each other, they are alternately active and passive, power
and resistance, organs moved and organs which move. The effect of every
muscle which contracts is not then only to act upon the bone in which
it is inserted, but also upon the opposite muscle. Between two muscles
thus opposed, there is often no solid intermediate organs, as in the
lips, the linea alba, &c. The muscle of one side acts then directly
upon that which corresponds to it, in order to distend it. Now this
action of the muscles upon each other is precisely the phenomenon
of the antagonists; two muscles are such when one cannot contract
without elongating the other and vice versa. Let us examine in this
phenomenon the part of the contractility of texture; it is necessary to
distinguish its influence from that of the vital forces, which has not
been heretofore sufficiently done.

A muscle once placed in the middle position, can only be removed from
it by the influence of the vital forces, by the animal or sensible
organic contractility, because in this position the contractility
of texture of its antagonist is equal to its own, and there is
consequently required a force added to this to overcome that which is
opposed to it. But if the muscle is found in one of the two extreme
positions, for example in adduction, abduction, flexion, extension,
&c. then there will be an inequality of action in the antagonists, as
it respects the contractility of texture; the one most stretched,
will make in order to contract itself, an effort much greater than
that which is already contracted. To maintain the equilibrium, it
is necessary then that the vital forces continue to influence the
contracted muscles. Thus every extreme position of the limbs and of
any moveable part, cannot in an ordinary state be supported except
by the influence of the vital forces. When these forces cease to be
in action, immediately the contractility of texture of the elongated
muscle, which had a tendency to exert itself, but was prevented, exerts
itself, becomes efficacious, and draws back the moveable part to the
middle position, a position in which the equilibrium is restored. Hence
why in all the cases in which the cerebral influence has no power
over the muscles, in which they are not irritated by stimulants, the
limbs are uniformly found in a medium position between extension and
flexion, abduction and adduction, &c. This is the case in sleep, in the
fœtus, &c. I have shewn elsewhere how the osseous arrangement of each
articulation is adapted to this phenomenon, how every kind of relation
between the articular surfaces, except that of this medium position,
exhibits a forced state in which some ligaments are necessarily more
stretched than others, and in which the osseous surfaces are never in
so general contact as in this position. In certain fevers which have
so deleterious an influence upon the muscular life and texture, the
horizontal prostration and extension of the extremities do not arise
from an increase of the action of the extensors, but from the want of
energy of the flexors, which have not power to overcome the weight of
the limb; thus observe that every analogous attitude always coincides
with the signs of general weakness; this is the attitude of putrid
fevers, &c.

The section of a living muscle presents us with two phenomena which are
evidently the product of the contractility of texture.

1st. The two ends retract in opposite directions; there exists between
these divided ends a space proportional to the retraction. This
retraction is not in proportion, as has been thought, to the degrees of
the contractions of the muscle; if it was, it would be sufficient in
a transverse wound, in order to bring the divided edges together, to
place the limb in the greatest possible relaxation; now oftentimes, in
these cases, these ends still remain at a distance; then the retraction
is often superior to the greatest contraction of the muscle considered
in its natural state.

2d. The antagonist of the divided muscle which has no effort to
overcome, contracts and makes the moveable part incline from its side,
if there are not other muscles, which acting in the direction of the
first supply its functions. This last phenomenon takes place also to a
certain extent in paralysis of the face. The mouth is then drawn from
the sound side. I have observed however in this respect, that this
deviation is never as evident as it would be by the division of the
paralytic muscle, which has preserved its contractility of texture.
This remaining contractility forms a partial equilibrium with that of
the muscles of the sound side, during the absence of motions; thus
the deviations do not become very evident until the patients wish
to speak, until consequently the vital forces bring into action the
sound muscles, which the others cannot oppose. The paralysis of the
sterno-mastoideus exhibits for the whole head a phenomenon analogous to
that which the preceding muscles produce for the mouth. Strabismus also
oftentimes arises from this cause.

In general in all the phenomena, it is necessary to distinguish that
which belongs to the vital forces, from that which arises from the
contractility of texture. The muscles are antagonists as it respects
these forces, as well as it respects this contractility; now as the
contraction dependant on the nervous influence or irritability, is
much more conspicuous than that arising from the organic texture, the
phenomena of the antagonists are much more striking in paralysis, when
the sound muscles are brought into action in the first manner. It
appears that in many cases of paralysis, the contractility of texture
of the affected side is also a little altered; but it is never so
completely destroyed, that in the amputation of a paralyzed limb, there
is no muscular retraction. I have made this experiment upon a dog; the
nerves having been cut ten days before, and the limb having remained
immoveable since that period, the division of the muscles produced
a manifest separation between their edges; and even, in afterwards
cutting for the sake of comparison the limb that remained sound, I did
not find any difference.

It is especially when muscles have been first stretched, and this
stretching has ceased, that the contractility of texture becomes
evident. The puncture in ascites and an accouchement as it respects the
abdominal muscles, the opening of deep abscesses as it respects those
of the trunk, the extirpation of a tumour situated under any muscle,
&c. show us this property in action in a very striking manner. There
is however an observation to be made on this point, viz. that if the
extension has been of long continuance, or if it has been frequently
repeated, the subsequent contraction is much less, because the muscular
texture has been weakened by the painful state in which it has been;
hence, 1st, the flaccidity of the abdomen after repeated pregnancy; 2d,
the laxity of the scrotum, after the puncture of an old hydrocele; 3d,
I have seen at Desault's a man who was operated upon in Germany for a
fungus in the mouth, and who had, on that side on which the disease had
been, remarkable wrinkles, owing to the greater extent of the fleshy
part of that side, which could no longer contract like the other;
mastication, at this time could only be performed on the sound side;
4th, when women have had many children, the diaphragm is weakened by
repeated pressure, and hence in part the greater mobility of the ribs,
which compensate in some measure in females for the deficiency of
action of this muscle. I think that in many chronic affections of the
chest and abdomen, in which there is a long continued distension of
this muscle, physicians ought more than they do, to have regard to this
cause of difficulty of respiration, when the principle of distension no
longer exists, as after the evacuation of dropsies, &c.

The extent of the contractility of texture is in the muscles in
proportion to the length of the fibres; hence why in amputations,
the superficial part retracts more than the deep-seated; why in
sleep the phenomena of contractility of texture are very apparent
in the extremities, the muscles of which are very long; why, in the
antagonists, nature has in general opposed muscles of proportional
length; why consequently, a muscle with long fibres has rarely for
a counterpoise one with short ones, and vice versa. The flexors and
extensors of the arm, the fore-arm, the thigh and the leg are nearly
of the same extent; the rotators of the humerus within and without,
the first inserted into the sub-spinal depression, the others into the
sub-scapular, resemble each other also in this respect. The proportion
between the antagonists is still more remarkable on the face, where the
same muscles act most commonly in an opposite direction on each side of
the median line.

The quickness of the contractions, arising from the contractility of
texture, is not like that produced by the animal or sensible organic
contractility, which is uniformly more or less marked, according as
the nervous influence of the stimulant acts more or less strongly.
Every motion originating from the contractility of texture is slow,
uniform and regular; it is only when the muscular texture is weakened
that it diminishes; it does not increase except when this texture is
more developed; hence it follows that the varieties of quickness can
only be observed in different individuals, or in the same individual
at different periods, and not, as in the exercise of the vital forces,
from one instant to another. This is a great and remarkable difference
between the two species of properties.

Death weakens the contractility of texture but does not annihilate
it; a muscle being cut retracts a long time after life has left it.
Putrefaction alone puts a limit to the existence of this property.
It is the same with regard to extensibility. I would observe however
that while the muscles retain the vital heat, they have more power of
retraction, than when the chill of death has seized them.

Haller places on the same line and derives from the same principles,
the phenomena resulting from the contractility of texture, which,
with some slight differences, answers to his dead power, and those
produced by the action of the concentrated acids, alkohol, fire, &c.
on animal substances, which crisp, contract and acquire the horny
hardness from the effect of these different agents. But there are
many differences which essentially separate these phenomena from each
other. 1st. The contractility of texture is very slight in the organs
in which the faculty of having the horny hardness is very evident, for
example, in all the organs of the fibrous, fibro-cartilaginous, serous
systems, &c. &c. 2d. The contractility of texture is distributed in
very various degrees, to the different parts; from the muscles and the
skin, which possess the greatest degree of it, to the cartilages which
seem destitute of it, there are many variations; on the contrary, the
faculty of acquiring the horny hardness from the agents pointed out
is almost uniformly distributed, or at least its differences are much
less evident. 3d. One becomes nothing in dried organs, the other is
evidently preserved for many years, as parchment is a proof. 4th. The
first clearly receives an increase of power from life, especially in
the muscles; the second appears to be hardly modified by it. 5th. This
always exhibits sudden effects, rapid contractions. To feel the contact
of the fire, of the concentrated acids or alkohol, and to assume the
horny hardness, are two phenomena which the second brings together in
the animal parts; the contractility of texture, on the contrary, exerts
itself but slowly, as we have said. 6th. This last can never give
to the parts, the muscles especially, that remarkable density which
they exhibit in their horny hardening. 7th. The absence of extension
of the fibres is the only thing necessary for the contractility of
texture which has an unceasing tendency to activity; it requires on the
contrary in order to crisp the fibres, that they should be in contact
with a foreign body. I could add to these many proofs, in order to
establish an essential difference between the phenomena confounded by
the illustrious physiologist of Switzerland.


II. _Vital Properties._

The most of these properties perform a very important part in the
muscles. We shall first examine those of animal life, and afterwards
treat of those of organic.


_Properties of Animal Life. Sensibility._

Animal sensibility is that of all the vital properties which is the
most obscure in these organs, at least if we consider them in the
ordinary state. Cut transversely in amputations, in experiments upon
living animals, they do not experience any very painful sensation; it
is only when a nervous filament is touched, that pain is manifested.
The peculiar texture of the muscle is but slightly sensible; irritation
by chemical stimulants does not show much sensibility in it.

There is however a peculiar sensation, which in the muscles very
evidently belongs to this property; it is that which is experienced
after repeated contractions, and is called lassitude. After long
standing, it is in the thick bundle of lumbar muscles that this
sensation is especially felt. After walking, running, &c. if on a
horizontal plain, it is all the muscles of the lower extremities
which are more particularly fatigued; if on an ascending plain, it
is especially the flexors of the ilio-femoral articulation; if on
a descending one, it is the posterior muscles of the trunk. In the
employments which exercise particularly the superior extremities,
this sensation is often experienced in a remarkable manner, which
is certainly not owing to the compression made by the muscles in
contraction, upon the small nerves which run through them. In fact it
can take place without this antecedent contraction, as is observed
in the commencement of many diseases, in which it extends in general
over the whole muscular system, and in which the patients are, as
they say, fatigued and wearied, as after a long march. This sensation
appears to depend on the peculiar kind of animal sensibility of the
muscles, a sensibility which the other agents do not develop, and
which the permanency of contraction renders here very apparent. Thus
the fibrous system, sensible only to the means of distension which act
upon it, does not receive a painful influence from the other agents of
irritation. Observe that this painful sensation, which a too prolonged
motion produces in the muscles, is intended by nature to warn the
animal to place limits to it, without which the consequences would
be serious. Thus the peculiar sensation which arises from distended
ligaments, is designed to make the animal limit their extension.
Observe how each organ has its peculiar kind of sensibility; how
false an idea we should have of the existence of this property, if we
judged of it only from mechanical and chemical agents, and observe
particularly how nature accommodates to the uses of each organ its kind
of animal sensibility.

In phlegmasia of the peculiar muscular texture, the animal sensibility
is very often raised to a very great height; the least touch on the
skin becomes painful; the patient can hardly bear the weight of the
clothes, and frequently the least jar produces in the limbs the most
acute pains. But in general these pains are wholly different from the
painful sensation which we call lassitude; thus the pain of a ligament
stretched in a sound state, is not the same as that which arises from
the inflammation of a ligament or any other fibrous organ.

I would add to what I have said above upon this sensation, that some
organs are fatigued like the muscles, from too long continuance of
their functions; for example, the eyes by the contact of light, the
ears by that of sounds, the brain by thinking, &c. and in general all
the organs of animal life; it is even this general lassitude which
brings on sleep, as I have proved in my Researches upon Life. But
observe that the sensation which the eye, the ear, the brain and all
the external organs produce when thus fatigued is not the same as that
which arises from the over-exertion of the muscles; another proof of
the peculiar kind of their sensibility, and in general of that of every
living part.


_Animal Contractility._

This animal property, upon which all the phenomena of locomotion
and voice depend, which assists those of the internal and external
functions, has its seat exclusively in the animal muscular system;
it is this which distinguishes it from the organic, and from all
the others. It consists in the faculty of moving under the cerebral
influence, whether the will or other causes produce this influence.
The animal contractility has then, like the sensibility of the same
species, a peculiar character, differing from the two organic
contractilities, a character which consists in this, that its exercise
is not concentrated in the organ which is moved, but that it requires
also the action of the brain and the nerves. The brain is the principle
from which, if we may so say, this property goes, as it is that to
which all the sensations come; the cerebral nerves are the agents
which transmit it, as they are, though in an opposite direction, the
conductors of the sensitive phenomena. Whence it follows, that in order
to understand this property well, it is necessary to examine it in the
brain, in the nerves and in the muscle itself.


_Animal Contractility considered in the Brain._

Every thing in the phenomena of animal contractility proclaims the
influence of the brain.

In the ordinary state if more blood is carried to this organ, as in
anger; if opium, taken in a moderate dose, excites it slightly; if
wine produces the same effect, the muscular action increases in energy
in proportion as that of the brain is thus increased. If terror by
retarding the pulse, by diminishing the force of the heart, and even
the quantity of blood sent to the brain, strikes it with atony; if
the different narcotics, carried to excess, produce the same effect;
if wine prevents its action by its too great quantity, then observe
these muscles languish in their motion and experience even a remarkable
intermission. If the brain is wholly engrossed in its relations with
the senses, or in its intellectual functions, it, if we may so say,
forgets the muscles; these remain inactive; the man who looks or hears
with attention, does not move; neither does he who contemplates,
meditates and reflects. The phenomena of ecstasy, the history of the
studies of philosophers, often present us with this important fact,
this muscular inertia, the principle of which is in the distraction of
the cerebral influence, which does not increase in other functions,
only by diminishing in locomotion.

In diseases, all the causes which act strongly on the brain, re-act
suddenly on the animal muscular system; now this reaction is manifested
by two opposite states, by paralysis and by convulsions. The first is
the indication of diminished energy, the second that of increased; one
takes place in compressions from pus, effused blood, bones driven below
their natural level, and from the consequences of apoplexy; it is seen
in the attack of most hemiplegias, a sudden attack in which the patient
falls down, loses all consciousness and has all the signs of a cerebral
lesion. This lesion disappears, but its effect remains, and this effect
is the immobility of a part of the muscular system. The other state or
the convulsive, arises from the various irritations of the cerebral
organ from osseous fragments driven into its substance, from its own
inflammation or that of its membranes, from different tumours of which
it may be the seat, from organic lesions that it may have, lesions
which I have rarely observed in the adult, but which infancy sometimes
exhibits, and from the causes even of compressions; for oftentimes we
see this convulsive state existing at the same time with different
effusions, with hydrocephalus, &c.

The state of the animal muscular system is truly the thermometer of the
state of the brain; the degree of its movements indicates the degree of
energy of this organ. Those who attend in a lunatic hospital have often
occasion to consult this thermometer. At the side of a furious patient,
whose muscular power is doubled, or even trebled, you see a man all
whose motions languish in a remarkable inertia. A thousand different
degrees are observed in these motions; now these degrees do not depend
upon the muscles; the most furious madman is often he whose very
delicate external forms indicate the weakest muscular constitution; as
the most perfect automaton is sometimes he whose muscles are the most
powerfully developed. The muscles are to the brain what the arteries
are to the heart. The physician learns by these vessels the state of
the central organ of circulation which communicates impulse to them; by
the muscles of animal life, he learns the state of the central organ of
this life. Observe patients in many important fevers; in the morning
there is prostration, in the evening you find an extreme agitation in
the muscles. Now what is the seat of this revolution? It is not the
muscles, but it is the brain. There has been a translation to the head,
as it is commonly called.

If from the bed of the sick we go to the laboratory of the
physiologist, we shall see experiments in perfect accordance with
the preceding observations. The ligature of all the arteries that go
to the brain, interrupts immediately the movements of this organ,
movements necessary to its action, and produces a sudden cessation
of voluntary motion, and afterwards death. By injecting through the
carotid and towards the head, ink, solutions of neutral salts, acids,
substances whose contact is fatal to cerebral action, I have always
seen the animal perish with previous convulsive motions. The injection
of water does not produce this effect; it can with impunity to the life
of the brain be introduced into the arterial blood, if it is injected
moderately; but pushed with force, you will irritate extremely this
organ, and in an instant the animal is seized with violent agitations;
moderate the force, rest succeeds. I have already related this
experiment elsewhere. If we lay bare the cephalic mass, and irritate
it with a mechanical or chemical agent, &c. in an instant the animal
muscular system is brought into action. It is however to be observed
that in these experiments the convexity of the organ appears to be much
less connected with the motions, than its base. The irritation confined
to the cortical substance, to the superficial layers of the medullary,
is almost nothing; it is not till we arrive at the inferior layers,
that the convulsions come on. I have wished to try many times to
ascertain with precision the place where the irritation becomes a cause
of convulsion; but this has always appeared to me very difficult, and
the results have been infinitely various. I believe that we can hardly
establish any thing more than a general result, viz. that the nearer we
approach in the experiments the annular protuberance, and in general
the cerebral base, the more apparent are the convulsive phenomena; they
are so much the less as we remove from them, they are nothing on the
convex surface. Observe that it is on the side of its base, that is to
say, on the side of its essential part, that the brain receives the
numerous vessels which carry to it excitement and life, whether by the
motion which they communicate to it, or by the nature of the red blood
which they carry to it, as my experiments published the year passed
have, I think, demonstrated.

Add to these experiments those of the artificial commotions. The
muscles of the ox vacillate, and are unable to support themselves,
the instant the blow is struck. At other times animals expire, their
limbs convulsively agitated from a blow given on the occiput; rabbits
often exhibit this phenomenon. Pigeons die with convulsive motions of
the wings. Irregular agitations arising from an irregular influx of
the power of the brain always precede the instant of death, which the
commotion has produced.

Let us conclude from all these experiments and the observations that
precede them, that the action of the animal muscular system is always
essentially connected with the state of the brain, and that when this
action is increased or diminished there is almost always an increase or
diminution of the cerebral action.

Let us not however exaggerate the relation which connects the muscular
to the cerebral phenomena; observation would prove us incorrect.
There are various examples of aqueous, sanguineous and even purulent
congestions in the brain, without having produced any alteration in
muscular motion. Different tumours and defects of conformation have
occasioned disturbance of the intellectual functions, without affecting
those of the muscles; how many times is the brain disordered in
various species of alienations; how many times do the understanding,
memory, attention and imagination indicate these derangements by
their irregular aberrations, without their being felt by the muscular
system. Is there not often an alteration of the external sensation,
without an alteration of motion? In general the brain has three great
functions. 1st. It receives the impressions from the external senses;
it is in this relation the seat of perception. 2d. It is the principle
and the centre of the voluntary motions, which are not exerted but
by its influence. 3d. The intellectual phenomena are essentially
connected with the regularity of its life; it is as it were the seat of
them. Now it can be deranged as to one of these functions, and remain
sound as to the others; it can be a regular principle of the motions,
and an irregular centre of the phenomena of the understanding; not
communicating with external objects by the senses, and determining
motions, or presiding over intellectual functions, as happens in sleep
which is disturbed by dreams, &c.

From what has been said we can understand why acephalous fœtuses
cannot live out of the womb of the mother. As animal life is nothing
in the fœtus, as respiration does not take place, as the functions are
limited to the great circulation, to the secretions, exhalations and
nutrition, the acephalous fœtuses can live in the womb of the mother,
and acquire a very considerable size; but at birth they cannot breathe,
the intercostals and diaphragm being unable to act. The gastric viscera
receives no influence from their muscular parietes; all the limbs are
immoveable. Animal life, which commences in others at birth, cannot
commence in them, because they have not the centre of this life; they
have senses, but nothing to receive their impressions; muscles, but
nothing to make them move; they can continue to live but a little
while in themselves, without beginning to live from without. But as in
general it appears that when the infant quits the womb, the red blood
becomes necessary to it, that to have this, it must respire, and as
this function cannot commence, it loses the internal life which it had
in the womb of the mother. There are acephalous fœtuses which have at
the origin of the nerves a small medullary swelling; in others the
spinal marrow is larger. If these medullary swellings, if the spinal
marrow by its peculiar texture, supply the place of the brain, life
can continue, and it is in this way that we can explain some examples
of acephalous subjects that have lived a certain time. But certainly
an acephalous subject organized like ourselves, which has nothing to
supply the place of the brain, cannot live. Thus in almost all the
examples of these monsters, related by authors, and especially by
Haller, the death of the individual took place at its birth.


_Animal Contractility considered in the Nerves._

The brain, at a distance from almost all the muscles, communicates with
them by the nervous system, and by it transmits to them its influence;
now this communication is made in two ways. 1st. There are nerves which
go directly from the brain to the muscles of animal life. 2d. The
greatest number does not go from this organ itself, but from the spinal
marrow. Almost all the muscles of the neck, all those of the chest, the
abdomen and the extremities receive theirs from this last source. The
spinal marrow is, as it were, a general nerve, of which the others are
only divisions and principal branches.

All the lesions of this principal nerve are felt by the muscles that
it has under its influence; the compressions that it experiences from
a fracture of the vertebræ, from any displacement, from an effusion
of blood, serum, pus, &c. in the vertebral canal, the derangements
which take place from a violent blow received upon the whole region
of the spine, from a fall upon the loins, or on the superior part of
the sacrum, are followed by numbness and paralysis of the subjacent
muscles. Divide the spinal marrow, by introducing a scalpel into the
canal, immediately all motion ceases below the division. If you wish on
the contrary to produce convulsions, introduce a stilet into the canal;
irritate the marrow with it or by chemical agents placed on it, there
will be immediately agitation and convulsion in all the animal and
muscular system that is below.

The higher the lesion of the marrow is, the more dangerous is it.
In the lumbar region its influence extends only to the inferior
extremities, and the muscles of the pelvis; in the back it paralyzes
these muscles and those of the abdomen; now as these last contribute
indirectly to respiration, this function begins to be embarrassed; if
the lesion is above the dorsal region, it becomes still more painful,
because the intercostals lose their action; the diaphragm alone then
supports the respiratory phenomena, because the phrenic nerve still
receives and transmits the cerebral influence. But when the lesion
happens above the origin of this nerve, there is no more action of the
diaphragm, and no more contraction of the intercostal and abdominal
muscles; respiration ceases; from the same cause the circulation is
interrupted; the blood being no longer carried to the brain, the action
of this organ is annihilated. Hence why the luxations of the first
vertebra on the second are suddenly fatal, when the displacement is
very great; why judicious surgeons dare not sometimes run the hazard
of reduction, when these luxations are partial, for fear of rendering
them complete, and of thus seeing the patient, whom they attempted to
relieve, perish in their hands; why, when we wish to knock down an
animal, the blow should be given on the superior and posterior part
of the spine; and why a stilet plunged between the first and second
vertebræ immediately destroys life.

We see very distinctly the successive influence of the different parts
of the marrow on the muscles and on the general life, by introducing a
long piece of iron into the inferior part of the vertebral canal of an
animal, of a guinea pig for example, and carrying it up through this
canal to the cranium, through the spinal marrow which it tears. We
observe evidently as it ascends, at first convulsions of the inferior
extremities, then those of the abdominal muscles, then derangement of
respiration, then its cessation, then death which is the consequence of
it.

From all these facts, we cannot, I think, call in question the
influence of the spinal marrow upon motion, the principle of which it
receives from the brain and afterwards transmits it to the nerves.
These last carry this principle, which they have received, to the
muscles, either by means of the spinal marrow, as in almost all those
of the trunk and the extremities, or directly from the brain, as in
those of the face, the tongue, the eyes, &c. There are the same proofs
for this nervous influence, as for that of the preceding sensitive
organs. The tying, division or compression of a nerve paralyzes the
corresponding muscle. Irritate with any agent a nerve laid bare in an
animal, convulsive contractions are immediately seen in the muscle.
These experiments have been so often and so accurately repeated by many
authors, that I think it useless to go into details, which the reader
may find everywhere. Irritation continued some time upon one point
of the nerve destroys its influence upon the muscle, which remains
immoveable; but it is put in motion again, if the irritation is carried
to a lower part of the nerve. If we tie it, the motion ceases, if
irritation is made above the ligature, it returns when it is made
below, or when the ligature is removed.

I would remark that all the nerves of animal life do not appear to
be equally capable of transmitting to the muscles the different
irradiations of the brain. In fact whilst in diseases, in wounds of
the head, in our experiments, &c. the muscles of the extremities are
convulsed or paralyzed with great ease, those of the abdomen, the neck,
and especially the chest do not exhibit these phenomena, except when
the causes of excitement and debility are carried to the highest point.
Nothing is more frequent than to see the abdomen and the chest with
their ordinary degree of muscular contraction, whilst the extremities
or the face are agitated with convulsive motions. Examine most
hemiplegias; the mouth is twisted, the superior and inferior extremity
of one side become immoveable, and yet the pectoral and abdominal
motions continue. Those of the larynx are more easily interrupted
than these in paralysis; hence the different injuries of the voice.
We could make a scale of the susceptibility of the muscles to receive
the cerebral influence, or of the nerves to propagate it, for it is
difficult to determine to which of these two causes the phenomenon is
owing; we could, I say, make a scale, at the top of which should be
placed the muscles of the extremities, then those of the face, then
those of the larynx, afterwards those of the pelvis and the abdomen,
and finally the intercostals and diaphragm. These last become convulsed
and paralyzed with the most difficulty of all. Observe how this scale
is adapted to that of the functions. What would become of life, which
is always actually connected with the soundness of respiration, if
all the cerebral lesions were as easily felt by the diaphragm and the
intercostals, as by the muscles of the extremities? Paralysis in these
last only takes from the animal a means of communication with external
objects; in the others it interrupts immediately both internal and
external life.

The nervous influence is only propagated from the superior to the
inferior part, and never in an inverse direction. Cut a nerve in
two, its inferior part when irritated will make the subjacent
muscles contract; let them do what they will to excite the other, no
contraction is produced in the superior muscles; so the spinal marrow
divided transversely and pricked above and below, produces no sensible
effect but in the second direction. The nervous influence never extends
upward for motion, as it does for sensation.


_Animal Contractility considered in the Muscles._

The muscles essentially destined to receive the cerebral influence
by means of the nerves, have however an active part in their own
contraction. It is necessary that they should be entire to exercise
this property, and answer to the excitement of the brain. When any
lesion affects their texture, and it is no longer the same as usual,
the muscle remains immoveable or moves with irregularity, though
it receives a regular nervous influx. The following are various
circumstances relative to the muscle itself, which prevent or alter its
contractions.

1st. An inflamed muscle does not contract; the blood which then
infiltrates it and penetrates its fibres, their great excitement and
the increase of its organic forces, do not permit it to obey the
stimulus it receives. In angina, deglutition is as much interrupted
by the inaction of the muscles, as by the inflammation of the mucous
membrane. We know that the inflammation of the bladder is one cause of
the retention of urine; that of the diaphragm renders respiration very
painful, which the intercostals perform almost alone.

2d. Every thing which tends to weaken and relax the muscular texture,
as external blows, bruises, contusions, infiltrations of serum in
dropsical limbs, or distension from a subjacent tumour long continued,
alters, changes the nature of, and can even annihilate animal
contractility.

3d. Whenever the blood ceases to enter the muscles by the arteries,
these organs remain immoveable. Steno has observed, and I have always
seen, that in tying the aorta above its bifurcation which forms the
internal iliacs, paralysis of the inferior extremities immediately
comes on. We know that in the operation for aneurism, a numbness more
or less considerable almost always follows the ligature of the artery.
This numbness continues until the anastomoses supply the place of the
artery which no longer brings any fluid. The internal motion created in
the muscle by the entrance of the blood, is then a condition essential
to muscular contraction. Thus the habitual motion imparted to all the
other organs and especially to the brain, maintains their excitement
and their life.

4th. It is necessary in order to obey the cerebral influence that the
muscle should not only receive the shock of the blood, but also of
the red or arterial blood. Black blood cannot by its contact support
motion. A general weakness and the fall of the animal are the first
symptoms of asphyxia, a disease in which the black blood goes to all
the parts. I shall not here repeat the proofs of this assertion, which
appears to me to be amply demonstrated by my Researches upon the
Different Species of Death. I refer to my work upon this point.

5th. A fluid differing from the blood, water, oily and albuminous
fluids, and for a stronger reason acrid and irritating fluids, the
urine, solutions of the acids and the alkalis, &c. are not proper to
support muscular action; on the contrary they paralyze it; injected
into the crural arteries of a living animal instead of blood, which
is stopt above by a ligature, they weaken and even annihilate the
motions, as I have frequently satisfied myself. The result varies in
these experiments according to the fluid employed in making them; the
rapidity of the cessation of the motions is more or less striking; they
are either weakened or totally suspended; but there is always a very
great difference between that and the natural state.

6th. Does the contact of the different gases upon the muscles modify
their contractions? Since the publication of my Treatise upon the
Membranes, I have made no experiment upon this point. Those which are
contained in it present the following results; frogs and guinea pigs
rendered emphysematous by blowing air into the sub-cutaneous texture
which afterwards penetrates the cellular interstices, and comes
everywhere in contact with the muscular system, move almost the same
as usual. If oxygen is used, the motions of the emphysematous animals
are not accelerated; they are not diminished if we employ the carbonic
acid gas, hydrogen, &c. In general, all the artificial emphysemas that
I have made upon the two species mentioned, in order to have an example
in each class of animals with red and cold blood, and of those with red
and warm blood, succeeded very well, and did not appear to cause any
sensible embarrassment to the animal, which gradually got rid of it.
Emphysema with nitrous gas is constantly fatal; the contact of this gas
seems almost suddenly to strike the muscles with atony.

7th. If instead of blowing gas into the cellular texture of an animal,
we force in different fluid substances, they produce different effects
upon the muscles, according to their nature, and to their acrid,
soft, or styptic qualities. No injection produces a more sudden and
striking effect than that of opium dissolved in water, or than that of
its various preparations; when the muscles feel it in contact, their
motions cease, they fall as in paralysis.

In general I would observe that it is infinitely better to make the
experiments of the contact of the gases and the different fluids upon
the muscles, by blowing the first, and injecting the others into the
intermuscular texture of a living animal, than by drawing out a
muscle, and afterwards plunging it all alive into the one or the other;
or than laying a muscle bare, in order to direct upon it the current of
a gas, or to moisten it with a fluid, for the purpose of observing the
phenomena of the contact.

It follows from all that we have just said, 1st, that to answer to
the cerebral excitement by contracting, the muscle should be in
general in a state determined by the laws of its organization; that
out of this state it is not capable of contracting, or at least that
it does it feebly and irregularly; 2d, that the contact of different
foreign substances produces upon the muscle a very variable effect.
Moreover many causes besides those stated above, appear to me also
to alter the contractions, by acting directly upon the muscles, such
as mercury taken by friction for the venereal disease, the influence
of this metal, of copper and of lead, upon those who work in them,
the action of cold, that of certain fevers, &c. The muscular tremor
arising from these different causes, does not appear to arise from
the brain; this organ at least does not most commonly give any sign
of affection in this case; I confess however that in these different
species of tremors, it is not easy to distinguish that which belongs to
the peculiar affection of the muscle, from what arises from that of the
nerves; perhaps these are especially affected, but the brain certainly
does not participate.


_Causes which bring into action Animal Contractility._

We have just seen that in the natural state this property constantly
requires three actions, 1st, that of the brain; 2d, that of the nerves;
3d, that of the muscles; that it is from the brain that the principle
of motion goes which is propagated by the nerves, and which the muscles
receive. But it is necessary that some agent should excite the brain to
determine it to exert its influence. In fact, the animal contractility
being essentially intermittent in its exercise, so that each time
after it has been exerted it is suspended, it is necessary that a new
cause should place it again in activity; now this cause acts at first
upon the brain in the natural state.

I refer to two classes the causes that excite the brain in order to
produce animal contractility. In the first is the will, in the second
are all the impressions which this organ receives, and which are not
under the control of the mind.

The brain is only intermediate between the mind and the nerves, as the
nerves are between the muscles and the brain; the principle, which
wills, acts at first upon this organ, which afterwards re-acts. When
they are thus produced, our motions are sometimes precise and regular;
that is when the intellectual functions are sound, when the memory,
imagination and perception are clearly exerted, when the judgment
being correct, directs with regularity the acts of the will; sometimes
they are irregular and singular, it is when the intellectual functions
disturbed and agitated in various ways, produce a singular and
irregular volition, as in the various mental alienations, in dreams, in
the delirium of fevers, &c. But in all these cases, these are always
voluntary motions; they go from the immaterial principle that animates
us.

In the second class of causes which influence the brain, the animal
contractility becomes involuntary; it is exerted without the
participation of the intellectual principle, often even against its
will. Observe an animal whose brain is artificially irritated in
experiments; it tries to stiffen itself to prevent the contractions,
they take place in spite of it; prick a nerve in an operation, the
muscle contracts suddenly below, without the mind's participating in
this movement; the patient has not even a consciousness of it; he
has only that of the pain. When much blood flows to the brain in the
violence of inflammatory fevers, this organ excited by the fluid,
re-acts immediately upon the muscles, without the will's partaking
in it. All the phenomena of contraction and relaxation, arising from
different accidents which accompany wounds of the head, cerebral
inflammations, &c. are equally involuntary, although having their
seat in the muscles which the will habitually directs. These are the
different circumstances in which the action of any agent upon the brain
is direct and immediate, and in which there is a mechanical cause
applied to the brain.

In other circumstances the brain is only affected sympathetically. In
many acute affections what is called translation to the brain, does not
arise from more blood being carried to it; the pulse is not fuller,
the face is not more flushed; there are often even signs of languor
in the action of the vascular system. The brain is affected, like all
the other organs by sympathy, a happy word, which serves to veil our
ignorance in respect to the relations of organs to each other; the
brain is affected then like the heart, the liver, &c. Take for example
peripneumony; the lungs are then the organs that are essentially
injured, from this essential and local injury, arise many sympathetic
ones more or less severe. If the liver is sympathetically affected,
bilious symptoms are joined to the symptoms of the principal affection;
if it is the stomach then gastric symptoms are manifested. The heart is
always agitated; hence there is fever. When the sympathetic influence
extends to the brain, there is violent motion, convulsions, &c.; for,
as I have said, the state of the muscles is the index of the state of
this organ; now, in this last circumstance, the will has nothing to do
with the animal contractility in exercise; the patient cannot prevent
the convulsive agitation of his muscles; the sympathetic irritation of
the brain is stronger than the influence of the will. This example of
cerebral affection in peripneumony, though more rare than in many other
diseases, may however give us an idea of what takes place in all other
cases in which the muscles are convulsively agitated by the injury of
any organ, by that of the fibrous system distended, of the ligaments
and especially of the aponeuroses, by dentition, by violent pains in
the kidneys, in the salivary glands or the pancreas, occasioned by
a stone, by injuries of the diaphragm, the nerves, &c. In all these
cases, there is an affected point in the economy; from this point the
sympathetic irradiations go off, which especially reach the brain; this
irritated by them, enters into action and excites the muscles; their
contraction takes place and the will is a stranger to it.

See also how the passions which have their influence particularly over
the internal organs, which especially affect those placed around the
epigastric centre, the heart, the liver, the stomach, the spleen, &c.
imprint on our motions an impetuosity, which the will cannot make us
masters of. The internal organ affected re-acts upon the brain, this
excited stimulates the muscles; they contract, and the will is almost
nothing in this contraction. Observe the man, whom jealousy, hatred
or rage agitates to the greatest degree; all his movements follow
each other with an impetuosity which judgment reproves, but which the
will cannot moderate, so much does the influence of the sympathetic
affection of the brain predominate over that of the will. At other
times the passions exhibit an opposite phenomenon. They are marked
by a general weakness of all the muscular motions. In astonishment
accompanied with grief, or in that in which is mixed a lively joy, the
arms fall down as it is commonly expressed; the cerebral influx ceases
almost entirely, and yet it is not to the brain that the influence of
this passion is carried, it is to the epigastric centre, as is proved
by the sudden contraction which is felt there. One of the epigastric
organs has been affected; it has reacted upon the brain; this has been
interrupted in part in its functions; the muscles feel it and theirs
cease. In fear in which this phenomenon is observed, as the paleness
of the skin indicates the languor of the circulating system, it may
happen that the cerebral and muscular inaction arises in great measure
from this, that there is not received a sufficient impulse from the
heart, upon which the first influence of the passion is exerted, and
which by this influence is retarded in its motions. Fear, it is said,
takes away the legs, petrifies, &c.; these expressions, borrowed from
vulgar language, indicate the effect of this passion on the muscles;
but this effect is only secondary; the first influence has been upon
the heart, the second upon the brain; it is not till after the other
two that the muscles are affected. Hence how certain animals remain
immoveable at the sight of that which is about to seize them for its
prey.

It is also to the sympathetic influence of the internal organs upon
the brain, that should be attributed the motions of the fœtus, motions
which the will does not direct; for the will is but a result of the
intellectual phenomena; now these phenomena are nothing at this period
of life. The internal functions then very active, suppose a great
action in the liver, the heart, the spleen, &c.; now these organs
in that way influence efficaciously the brain, and this in its turn
puts the muscles in motion; so that the animal contractility is by no
means voluntary in the fœtus; it does not begin to become so until the
sensations have brought into action the phenomena of the understanding;
until then, they must be compared to all those of which we have spoken
above.

From all that has just been said, it will be easily understood, I
hope, how the animal contractility can be or not subjected to the
influence of the will. In both cases, the series of phenomena which it
requires is always the same; there is always excitement by the brain,
transmission by the nerves, execution by the muscles, or successive
inactivity of these three organs. The difference is only in the cause
which produces the cerebral excitement; now this cause can be, 1st,
the will; 2d, an irritation immediately applied; 3d, a sympathetic
irritation. It is essential to form precise and exact ideas concerning
this vital force which performs so great a part in the living economy.


_Duration of the Animal Contractility after Death._

The difference of the causes which act upon the brain in the animal
contractility, in order to determine it to excite the muscles, appears
particularly in a remarkable manner at the instant of death. Whatever
may be the way in which this happens, the intellectual functions are
always the first to cease; it is even to this that we especially
attach the idea of the absence of life. Whence it follows that the
first phenomenon of this absence must be the failure of the muscular
contraction subjected to the influence of the will, which is the result
of these intellectual functions. Every thing then remains immoveable
in the muscular system, if no other cause acts upon the brain or the
nerves; but these two organs are, yet for a long time, capable of
answering to the various excitements of stimuli. Stimulate in any
way the brain, the spinal marrow or the nerves of an animal recently
killed, in an instant its muscles convulsively contract; it is the
same phenomenon as that obtained during life from the same cause.
Often even immediately after death, this phenomenon is still more
apparent than during life; I have been frequently convinced of this in
my experiments. If during life we irritate any nerve, the contraction
oftentimes is almost nothing, because the will acting by the other
nerves upon the same muscle, or at least upon those of the limb,
produces contractions opposite to those which the irritation tends to
produce. I have many times observed that the galvanic phenomena are
also infinitely more easily produced an instant after death, even in
animals with red and warm blood, than during life; in this last case
often we can obtain hardly any result, because their influence is
counteracted by the cerebral influence arising from the will. When the
irritation is directly applied to the brain or the superior part of the
spine, it then surpasses the will; it is stronger in the living animal;
but on an insulated nerve, it is often inferior to it; not that the
will acts by the irritated nerve, its influence in it is arrested at
the place stimulated, but it exerts itself by the adjacent nerves.

It is to the susceptibility of the brain and nerves of still
transmitting the principle of motion after death, that must be
referred all the phenomena that are witnessed in the different kinds
of decapitation. Ducks, geese and other animals of this family move
their muscles with some regularity, after the head is taken off, in
running, jumping, &c. Some time after the punishment of the guillotine,
the inferior and superior extremities are still the seat of various
tremors; the muscles of the face are sometimes even contracted so as
to give to this part the expression of certain passions, an expression
incorrectly referred to the sensitive principle still left for some
time in the brain. The same phenomena were formerly observed in the
punishment that consisted in cutting off the head with an axe. During
the year past I have had a painful proof of these singular facts; a
guinea-pig, whose heart I had just removed, plunged deep into my finger
the four prominent teeth that distinguish this species. All these
phenomena are only the result of the irritation produced, either by the
cutting instrument, or by the air, upon the two divided extremities
of the marrow; this is so true, that by increasing the irritation by
a pricking, cutting instrument, &c. with a chemical agent applied to
these extremities, the motions are very much increased. Nothing is
more easy than to be convinced of this fact in an animal; I have many
times proved it in those who have been guillotined, upon whom I have
been allowed to make experiments for galvanic purposes. See how the
alternate motions of respiration can continue for some time, after the
brain has been destroyed, after a wound of the head in which its mass
has been crushed, after a luxation of the first vertebra, in which
the beginning of the spinal marrow has been compressed so as suddenly
to stop life, after the injection of a very irritating fluid by the
carotid, &c. &c.

In this duration of animal contractility after death, the muscles are
absolutely passive; they obey, as during life, the impulse they receive
from the nerves; it is this which distinguishes it essentially from the
duration of irritability, a property by which, after death as during
life, the muscle has in it the principle which makes it move.

The duration is greater or less according to the class of the animals;
those with red and cold blood keep this property longer than those with
red and warm blood; among these, the family of ducks are, as I have
said, remarkable for this phenomenon, which is much more rapidly lost
in the others and in quadrupeds. In the first class there are also
varieties among the reptiles, fishes, &c.

In general I have constantly observed that the animal contractility
ceases after death, first in the brain, then in the spinal marrow and
last in the nerves. When the muscles no longer move by irritating
the first of these organs, they contract by stimulating the others.
The irritated nerves can still communicate a motion, when the spinal
marrow, no longer exhibits this phenomenon. I have not observed that
the superior part of the nerve ceased sooner to transmit motion, than
the inferior. But what is remarkable is that certain nerves, under
the influence of the same irritation, make their muscles contract
more strongly than others; such for example is the phrenic. When all
the other muscles cease to be moveable by the artificial excitement
of their nerves, the diaphragm is still moved by this means. Whilst
experiments have but little effect elsewhere, they are in full force
upon this muscle; this is the more remarkable, as during life this is
precisely the one which is the least affected by the state of the brain
and the spinal marrow; paralysis and convulsions hardly ever affect it,
as we have seen.

Besides, in thus comparing the duration of animal contractility, the
same stimulant should always be employed; for the effects are more or
less evident according to those which we use. When the whole brain and
the nerves are no longer sensible to mechanical or chemical agents,
they still powerfully obey galvanic impulses. The irritation of the
metals is of all the means at present known, the most efficacious in
perpetuating animal contractility some time after death.


_Organic Properties._

Organic sensibility is the manifest portion of the muscles of which
we are treating; constantly brought into action in them by nutrition,
absorption and exhalation, it becomes still more apparent, when we
irritate muscles that are laid bare; they feel this irritation, and
the motion, of which we shall speak hereafter, is the result of this
feeling which is centred in the muscle, and which is not referable to
the brain.

Insensible organic contractility is the attribute of this muscular
system, as of all the others.

The sensible organic contractility is very evident in it. If we lay
bare a muscle in a living animal, and irritate it with any agent,
it curls up, contracts and is agitated. A detached muscular portion
exhibits for some instants the same phenomenon.

Every thing is irritating to the naked muscle, the air, water, neutral
salts, the acids, the alkalis, the earths, metals, animal and
vegetable substances, &c. The mere contact is sufficient to produce
contraction. Yet besides this contact, there is something also which
depends upon the nature of the stimuli, and which makes the intensity
of the contractions vary. A powder of wood, coal, metal, &c. sprinkled
upon the muscles of a frog, produce but slight motions in it; pour on
it a neutral salt in powder, the marine salt for example, immediately
irregular agitations, and a thousand different oscillations are
manifested. Each body is by its nature capable of irritating the
muscles differently, as according to individuals, ages, temperaments,
seasons, climates, &c. the muscles are capable of answering differently
to excitements made upon them.

It is not necessary to irritate the whole of a muscle to produce its
contraction; two or three fibres only being pricked bring into action
all the others. Often even when we make these experiments on a living
animal, the contraction is communicated from one muscle to another. In
general I have constantly observed that during life these experiments
are less easy, and give results much more various, as we have already
stated with regard to animal contractility. Lay bare a muscle, irritate
it at many different times; sometimes it does not give the least sign
of contractility; sometimes it moves with force; this varies from one
instant to another. Whereas if it is upon an animal recently killed
that the experiments are made, the results are always nearly the same
in a given time, with the difference however of the weakness which the
contractions have in proportion to the length of time after death. It
never happens that you see a muscle immoveable under stimuli, which is
not rare in a living animal. This essential difference which authors
have not sufficiently pointed out, and which I have frequently proved
upon different animals, arises from this, that during life, the effects
of the nervous influence counteract those of the stimuli; for example,
if an animal extends with force his thigh by the posterior muscles,
we may in vain irritate the anterior ones, we cannot produce flexion
by this irritation. The cerebral excitement in the extensors being
stronger than the mechanical excitement in the flexors, triumphs. Often
when we apply the stimulant, the brain acts with force upon the muscle,
the effect is then much superior to the excitement we have applied. We
are astonished; but the astonishment ceases, if we recollect that there
is a concurrence of two excitements, of that of the external agent and
of that of the brain. In general, those who have made experiments, have
not paid sufficient attention to this concurrence of the two forces in
a living animal.

In order to estimate correctly the sensible organic contractility, it
is necessary to destroy the animal contractility. So long as these two
clash, interrupt and counterbalance each other, we cannot properly
estimate them, and determine what belongs to each and what is common
to both. Now we destroy animal contractility in the living subject, by
cutting all the nerves of a muscle or an extremity, which then become
paralyzed. The brain can no longer act upon them, and the results we
obtain from stimuli, belong to the sensible organic contractility.

The duration of this last property, after the experiment I mentioned,
proves completely that the nerves are wholly foreign to it, that it
resides essentially in the muscular texture, that it is, as Haller
said, inherent in it. Thus whilst in the different paralyses the
muscles lose the power of obeying the cerebral influence, or rather
this influence becomes nothing, they preserve that of contracting in an
evident manner when stimulated.

This contraction of the muscles of animal life by stimulants, appears
under two very different modes. 1st. The whole of the muscle can
contract and shorten so as to approximate the two points of insertion.
This happens in general when death is recent, when the muscle is still
fully possessed of life. 2d. There are oftentimes numerous oscillations
of the fibres; all are in action at the same time; now this action is
not a contraction, but a real vibration, a fluttering, which has not
a sensible effect upon the whole of the muscle, which not contracting
cannot approximate its moveable points. When life is about abandoning
entirely the muscle, it is thus that it moves. The diversity of the
stimuli occasions also this double mode of contraction. Carry a
scalpel over a living muscle, a contraction of the whole will be the
consequence; afterwards sprinkle the same muscle with a neutral salt,
sometimes there is an analogous contraction; but frequently there are
only oscillations, vibrations similar to those of a muscle which life
abandons.

During the life of the animal, its sensible organic contractility is
rarely in action, because the muscles have not agents that act upon
them in a sensible manner at least. Why then is this property so
developed in them? I cannot determine.

All the muscles do not possess it to the same degree; the diaphragm
and the intercostals are the most irritable; they are also those whose
organic contractility is the most permanent after death. Observe that
this contrasts, like their susceptibility to receive the nervous
influence by the irritation of their nerves, especially of the phrenic,
with the little disposition they have to feel, during life, convulsions
or paralysis. After them I think that the temporal, the masseter,
the buccinator, &c. are the most irritable. There is certainly as
it respects irritability a great difference between them and the
muscles of the extremities, which are all nearly equally susceptible
to the effect of stimulants. Besides, it is only by a great number of
experiments that we can establish general data; for nothing is more
frequent than to find inequalities between two analogous muscles, and
even between the corresponding ones of the two sides of the body.


_Sympathies._

The animal muscular system performs a very important part in the
sympathies. We see it very frequently agitated with irregular motions
in the different affections of our organs, especially in infancy when
every lively impression made upon any organ, is almost always followed
by spasmodic and convulsive motions in the muscles of animal life.
Observe in fact that it is the vital property predominant in this
system, that is to say the animal contractility, that is most often
brought sympathetically into action in it, by the influences that the
organs exert upon each other.

In general it appears that when the animal sensibility is strongly
developed in an organ, this system tends immediately to contract. The
acute pains that stones occasion in the kidneys, in the ureter and
even the urethra, distensions of the ligaments, of the aponeuroses,
dentition, surgical operations in which the patient has suffered much,
&c. produce very numerous and frequent sympathetic convulsions. I
know that there are very severe pains without sympathetic convulsive
motions; but it is very rare that you see convulsive motions of this
nature, without the organ, from which these sympathetic irradiations
go, is very powerfully affected, and the seat of great animal
sensibility.

Observe on the contrary that most of the sympathies which develop to a
great degree in any part, insensible organic contractility, or sensible
organic contractility, are not marked by these acute pains in the
affected organ from which the excitement goes; for example, sweats,
sympathetic secretions, intestinal and gastric contractions are rarely
produced by affections of the character of those from which arise the
sympathies of animal contractility.

The brain is always first affected in this last species of sympathies
in which the muscles are, as it were, passive, as we have already
seen, and in which they are made to obey the impulse they receive. The
affected organ acts at first upon the brain, then this re-acts upon the
muscles.

Authors have considered sympathies in too loose a manner. Some have
admitted, others have rejected the intermediate office of the brain;
some have not pronounced upon it. All would be agreed, if instead
of attempting to resolve the question in a general manner, they had
distinguished the sympathies according to the vital forces, of which
they are only aberrations and irregular developments; they would have
seen, that in the animal sympathies of contractility, the cerebral
action is essential; for we cannot conceive of any contractility of
this species, without the double influence, nervous and cerebral,
upon the muscles; that on the contrary, in the organic sympathies of
contractility, the action of the brain is nothing; the affected organ
acts directly and without any thing intermediate upon that which
contracts sympathetically. When the heart, the stomach, the intestines,
&c. move, when the parotid and other glands increase their action by
the sympathetic influence of an affected organ, certainly this organ
does not act first upon the brain; for it would then be necessary that
this should re-act upon those that contract; now it would not be able
to influence them except by the nerves, since it is only by these that
it is united to them; but all experiments and all facts prove as we
shall see, that the brain has not by this means any influence over the
organs with involuntary motions; then the action is direct and there is
nothing intermediate. There are sympathetic motions like the natural
ones; the sensible and insensible contractilities are constantly
brought into action by a direct stimulus applied to the organ, whilst
that the animal contractility is never exercised but by the cerebral
stimulant, which itself requires a cause, either sympathetic or
direct, in order to act upon the muscles.

Next to animal contractility, the sensibility of the same nature is
the most often brought sympathetically into action in the animal
muscular system. The lassitude, wandering pains, sensation of weight
and stretchings that are felt in the limbs in the beginning of many
diseases, are phenomena purely sympathetic, in which this property
enters into action in the muscles. At advanced periods of many other
affections, these sympathetic troubles are also very remarkable, but
less in general than at the beginning.

The organic properties are for the most part rarely sympathetically in
action in the species of muscles of which we are treating. Besides, if
they are so, we can hardly judge of it, because no sign points it out
to us. The sweat in the skin, the secreted fluids in the glands, the
fluids exhaled upon many of the surfaces, are general results which
indicate to us the sympathetic derangements of the organic sensibility
and of the insensible contractility of the same species. In the
muscles, we have not the same means of knowing these alterations.


_Characters of the Vital Properties._

From what we have thus far said, upon the muscular properties and
sympathies, it is easily seen that the vital activity must be in
general much greater in the muscles than in the organs previously
examined in this volume; thus all their affections begin to take
a peculiar character that distinguishes them from those of these
organs; they are much more prompt and rapid. Yet let us remark that
all the alterations of function which they exhibit, cannot assist us
in estimating this vital activity. In fact, many of these alterations
do not reside essentially in the muscular texture, their cause is not
there; such are for example all the convulsive motions in which, as we
have seen, the muscles act by obeying, but have not the principle of
action in them. They are then the indices of cerebral alterations; thus
the arteries, which exhibit such numerous varieties in the state of the
pulse, are as it were only passive, and serve most frequently merely
to indicate the state of the heart by their motion, whilst the veins,
which have not at the origin of their circulation an analogous agent of
impulse, very rarely exhibit varieties, though however their texture
may have as great vital forces, and its life be as active or more so,
than that of the arteries.

One proof that the texture of the muscle is less often altered than it
at first seems to be in considering the frequency of the affections
of these organs, is the infrequency of their organic lesions. These
lesions are even less common in them than in the bones. We do not see
in them those schirri, swellings, changes of texture in a word, which
are so commonly met with in the other organs. Among the great number
of subjects that I have had occasion to dissect or to have dissected,
I do not recollect to have seen in the muscles of animal life other
alterations than those of their cohesion, their density and their
colour. It is a phenomenon that approximates them to those of organic
life, in which we rarely meet with changes of texture, as the heart,
the stomach, &c. are examples.

The muscular texture of animal life rarely suppurates; thus but little
is known of its mode of suppuration. In general, it appears that
inflammation terminates in it almost always by resolution. Induration,
gangrene and suppuration, three terminations that this affection often
makes in the other parts, are unknown to this in the greatest number of
cases.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

PHENOMENA OF THE ACTION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

Thus far we have spoken of muscular mobility, abstractedly from the
phenomena that it exhibits in the muscles, when it is in exercise in
them. These phenomena are now to be considered. They relate especially
to contraction, which is the essentially active state of the muscle,
relaxation being a state purely passive. We shall easily understand
the phenomena of this, when those of the other of which they are the
reverse are known to us.


I. _Force of the Muscular Contraction._

The force of the contraction of the muscles of animal life varies
much, according as it is brought into action by stimulants, or by the
cerebral action.

Every irritation made upon a muscle laid bare produces only a brisk,
rapid motion, but generally not very powerful. I have frequently
satisfied myself in my experiments that it is impossible to approximate
even at a great distance by this means, the great energy which
the brain communicates to the muscles of animal life. The organic
muscular system which stimuli directly applied put principally in
motion, never has exacerbations of force corresponding to those
which the animal contractility exhibits in so great a degree under
certain circumstances. It is then especially when the muscles move
in virtue of this last property, that the force of their contraction
must be considered. Now this contraction can, as we have seen, be
produced, 1st, by stimulating the brain in experiments; 2d, when
its excitement takes place in the natural state by the will, or by
sympathy. In the first case, the force of the contraction is never
very powerful, whatever may be the stimulant employed, either upon
the brain, or the nerves laid bare. I have uniformly observed a very
rapid convulsive motion, analogous to that produced by exciting the
muscles themselves, but never as strong as that which is the result of
vital action. Notwithstanding what some physiologists have written, we
can never by irritating the nerves of the flexors impart to them an
energy comparable to that which the will can give them. Irritate for
example the sciatic nerve in an inferior extremity which has just been
amputated, the toes will never bend with the force which they do in
certain cases in the natural state. I have twice made this experiment
in amputations performed by Desault. Unacquainted then with physiology,
I was much struck with this phenomenon.

In the cerebral excitement and in that of the spinal marrow, we cannot
so well appreciate the force of the contractions which result from
it, as when we stimulate an insulated nerve; in fact, all the system
entering then into convulsive action, the extensors destroy in part
the effort of the flexors and vice versa. The muscles simultaneously
in action, counterbalance, interfere with and injure each other. The
stimulant which gives the greatest force to the contractions, has
always appeared to me to be galvanism.

In the living state, the force of muscular contraction depends on two
causes; 1st, on the muscle; 2d, on the brain. These two causes are in a
variable proportion; it is necessary to consider them separately.

Under an equal cerebral influence, a muscle well nourished, which
appears distinctly through the integuments, and has very large fibres,
will contract much more strongly than that which is delicate, slender,
with loose, pale, small fibres, and which makes but a slight prominence
under the integuments. In our ordinary manner of considering muscular
force, it is to this state of the muscles that we especially attend.
The statues which exhibit strength and vigour, have always as an
attribute a powerful development of the muscular forms. When the brain
acts upon these muscles with energy they are capable of extraordinary
motions. I shall not relate examples of the astonishing efforts of
which they are susceptible. Haller and others have cited many of them,
either in the muscles of the back in carrying burdens, or in the
muscles of the superior extremities in raising great weights, or in the
inferior extremities in leaping or in order to preserve attitudes which
suppose enormous resistances to be overcome.

It is especially the cerebral influence that increases much the force
of muscular contraction. The will can raise this force very high; but
the different excitements that are foreign to it, raise it infinitely
more. We know the force that a man acquires in anger, that of maniacs,
of persons in the cerebral excitement of a fever, &c. In all these
cases the impulse communicated by the brain, is sometimes such, that
the most delicate muscles of the feeblest woman surpass in energy those
of the strongest man in the ordinary state.

The force of muscular contraction is then in a ratio compounded of the
force of the organization of the texture of the muscles, and of the
force of the cerebral excitement. If both are slight, the motions are
almost nothing; if both are at the highest degree, it is difficult to
conceive how far the effects may go which result from them; a maniac
with thick and strong muscles is capable of efforts that we should
in vain attempt to calculate. If the nervous force is very powerful,
and the muscular texture feeble, or if an inverse state exists, the
phenomena of contraction are less. In general nature has almost always
united these two things in this last manner. Women and children who
have a weak fleshy texture, have a very great nervous mobility; men
on the contrary, those especially with athletic forms, whose nervous
systems are less easily excited, receive more rarely the causes of a
strong influence upon their muscles.

Whatever may be the point of view in which we consider the force of
the contractions of the muscular system of animal life, it is always
very great in proportion to the effect which results from these
contractions. Nature in the economy follows a law the reverse of that
of the motion of our common machines, the great advantage of which
is to increase the moving powers, to produce a great effect with a
small force. Here there is always a great expenditure of force for
a small effect, which is owing to the numerous causes that tend to
destroy the effect of this force. 1st. The muscles act almost always
upon a very unfavourable lever, upon that in which the power they
represent is nearer the point of support than the resistance. 2d. All
in contracting have to overcome the resistance of the antagonists. 3d.
As in each motion there is always a fixed point, the effort which,
after contraction, is carried upon this fixed point, is entirely lost.
4th. Various frictions injure also the motion. 5th. The obliquity
of the insertion of the muscles upon the bones, an obliquity that
approaches nearer a horizontal than a perpendicular direction, an
obliquity not less remarkable for the fleshy attachments upon the
tendon or aponeuroses, offers a double cause of weakness. All these and
many other reasons which we might with Borelli, who was the first to
make these important remarks upon muscular motion, add to them, prove
that the absolute or real force of the muscles is infinitely superior
to their effective force. Yet all are not so unfavourably arranged;
in some, as the solæus, the insertion is perpendicular to the bone;
in others, as the muscles which act upon the head, we observe that
they are powers of a lever of the first kind. In general, in order to
estimate the force of a separate muscle, the deltoid, for example, it
is necessary especially to have regard to the distance of its insertion
at the point of support, to the degree of opening of the angles formed
by the fleshy fibres upon the tendon, and afterwards by the tendon
upon the bone, and to the division of the forces between the fixed and
moveable points.

Some advantages seem to compensate in a slight degree in certain
muscles for their bad arrangement as to the power of motion; such are,
1st, the sesamoids, the patella, the different eminences of insertion,
the enlargement of the large bones at their extremities, &c. which
remove the fibres to a distance from the moveable points; 2d, the
intermuscular fat, that which is in the neighbourhood of the muscles,
the fluid of synovial sheaths, which facilitate motions by lubricating
the surfaces that execute them; 3d, the aponeurotic expansions that
confine down the motions on the extremities; 4th, these motions
themselves, those of flexion for example, which, as they take place,
diminish the obliquity of the insertion of the flexors, and render it
even perpendicular, as has been well observed by a modern author.

Many calculations have been made upon the waste of muscular motion,
upon the effort of a muscle which contracts, compared with the effect
that results from it. They can never be precise because the vital
forces vary to an infinite degree, because they are not the same in
two individuals and because the cerebral influence and the force of
muscular organization are never in constant proportion in the same
subject. It is a peculiarity of the vital phenomena to escape all
calculations, and to exhibit, like the forces from which they emanate,
a character of irregularity which distinguishes them essentially from
the physical phenomena. Let us conclude only from the preceding
observations, that the muscular effort carried to the highest point by
cerebral excitement, can produce astonishing effects, which suppose a
force of contraction hardly conceivable; such is the rupture of the
strong tendons, of the patella, the olecranon, &c.; such is also the
resistance often opposed to the enormous distensions that are used in
luxations, fractures, &c.


II. _Quickness of the Contractions._

The contractions should be considered under the relation of their
quickness as under that of their force.

1st. If it is by stimulants that they are produced, by laying bare a
muscle and acting directly upon it, they vary according to the state
of vitality of the muscle, and according to the body which stimulates.
In the first moments of the experiment, they succeed with rapidity and
are sometimes connected together with such quickness that the eye can
hardly follow them. As the muscle becomes weak, its contractions become
less prompt; and they cease at the end of some time. We can reanimate
them by employing a very active stimulant; the fibres finally become
insensible to this also.

2d. If it is by irritating the nerve that we make a voluntary muscle
contract, we produce a still greater quickness of contraction than by
stimulating the muscle itself. Running would be almost immeasurably
rapid, if each contraction that it requires was equal to those that we
thus obtain, especially when we act on the one hand on very sensitive
animals, and on the other with very active stimulants, galvanism
for example. Upon this subject I have made a remark, it is that the
quickness and the force of the contractions are not commonly greater if
we irritate at the same time all the nerves that go to a muscle, than
if we irritate but one.

3d. When it is the will that regulates the quickness of the muscular
contractions, this quickness has infinitely various degrees; but
there is always one beyond which we cannot go. This degree is not
the same for all men; there is even among them in this respect very
great differences, which are foreign to the force of organization of
the muscles; it is rare even that individuals with a very powerful
muscular system are the best runners. I do not know that we have yet
observed the exterior habit of the body which indicates the quickness
of the contractions, as there is one which denotes their force; it must
however exist. Animals are like men; the degree of quickness which
each can attain, is infinitely variable. I shall not cite examples of
rapid races, of analogous motions given by the superior extremities, as
those of the fingers in performing on certain instruments, the violin,
the flute, &c.; astonishing ones may be read of in many authors. I
would only remark, that there are but few motions which give us a
greater idea of this quickness, than the sudden and rapid contractions
which, in the inferior extremities, produce a leap, or that powerful
action of these extremities when we give a kick with the foot; which
in the superior serve for the projection of heavy bodies; which in
the same limbs assist to push the trunk back, when we support them
against a resisting point, and afterwards suddenly stretch them to
push this point forward, which not yielding, the motion rebounds upon
the trunk; which preside over the action of giving a blow of the hand;
which in the fingers produce the sudden motion, from which results
what is called a fillip, &c. &c. I confound all these motions almost
entirely analogous to leaping, and which differ from it only in the
more or less evident effects that they produce. Authors, it may be
observed, have not sufficiently established the resemblances between
these various sudden and rapid contractions; they have considered
leaping in too insulated a manner. But let us return. The degree of
rapidity of muscular contractions is greatly subordinate to exercise.
The habit of making certain muscles act renders them more quick in
their contraction; for example, walking which accustoms us to contract
alternately the extensors and the flexors of the lower extremities,
fits us wonderfully for swiftness in running. When any man practises
for a little time this last exercise, he soon attains the greatest
rapidity of which his muscular system is capable. On the contrary, the
motions of adduction and abduction being more rare in the ordinary
state, it requires a longer apprenticeship for dancers to learn to
carry their legs rapidly in and out, for the purpose of executing steps
in which they cross them alternately. In general, habit modifies much
more the quickness than the force of the contractions. Yet there is
always a limit which can never be passed, whatever may be the exercise
that we give to the muscles; this limit depends on the constitution;
each man is by it, a more or less active leaper and runner.


III. _Duration of the Contractions._

There is as it respects the duration of the contractions a remarkable
difference in the muscles, according as we excite these contractions
artificially or naturally.

When upon a living animal or one recently killed, we excite the muscle
itself, or we stimulate its nerves, the relaxation succeeds almost
suddenly the contraction; neither state is ever lasting, though we
continue for a long time the action of the stimulant; the effect which
it has produced is immediately exhausted. When galvanism, mechanical or
chemical agents are used in our experiments, the phenomenon is the same.

On the contrary, when the will directs the contraction, it can sustain
it for a very long time. The support of burthens, standing, &c. clearly
prove this fact. When even during life, a morbid irritation is directed
upon the nerves, the contraction can be very permanent, of which we
have terrible proofs in tetanus.

The permanence of the muscular contraction fatigues the muscle much
more than alternate relaxation and contraction. Hence why when we are
standing long, we contrive by turns to carry the weight of the body
more upon one limb than the other.


IV. _State of the Muscle in Contraction._

Muscles that contract exhibit different phenomena as follows:

1st. They evidently harden, as we may be convinced by placing the
hand on the masseter, the temporal or any other superficial muscle in
contraction.

2d. They increase in thickness; hence the greater prominence of all the
sub-cutaneous muscles when the body is in violent action. Sculptors
know this difference very well. A man at rest and a man in motion, have
in their statues an exterior wholly different.

3d. The muscles when they are not confined by the aponeuroses,
sometimes experience a slight displacement.

4th. They diminish in length, and thus the two points to which they are
fixed approximate.

5th. Their volume remains about the same. What they lose in length,
they nearly gain in thickness. Is the proportion very exact? Of what
consequence to us is this insulated question, to which, since the days
of Glisson, so much importance has have attached! it deserves none.

6th. The blood contained in the vessels of the muscles, especially in
the veins, is in part pressed out; we increase the flow of the blood
by the motions of the arm, the operation of bleeding proves both these
facts.

7th. Yet the muscle does not change colour; it is because it is not
the colouring portion of the blood circulating with it in the muscular
vessels that colours the muscles, but, as I have said, that which is
inherent in their texture and combined with their fibres; now this
combined colouring substance remains the same in relaxation and
contraction. The heart of the frog is pale when it contracts; but it is
because the blood it contains is evacuated and the transparency of its
parietes renders this phenomenon evident.

8th. In contracting, the muscles become the seat of many small
transverse wrinkles, sensible especially in the contractions of
oscillation, less apparent in those of the whole of the muscle, and
almost nothing, when a muscle being laid bare in a living animal,
contracts with a small degree of force.

9th. All authors consider contraction in too uniform a manner; they
have described the phenomena of it, as if in every case the muscle
contracted alike; but it is evident that there are numerous differences
in the state in which it then is. 1st. There is the slow and insensible
contraction produced by the contractility of texture, when we cut a
muscle or when its antagonist is paralyzed. 2d. The quick and sudden
contraction produced by the will, or by the excitement of a nerve, a
mode of motion that takes place most commonly either in the ordinary
state, or in convulsions. 3d. The species of oscillation of which I
have already spoken, and which affecting each fibre in a muscle, does
not yet produce any very sensible effect upon the whole, contracts
it a little, but scarcely approximates at all its moveable points;
this is the kind of motion which takes place in the tremors produced
by cold, by fear, by the beginning of a fit of intermittent fever,
&c. By laying bare a muscle in an animal that is made to shiver, we
see that this kind of contraction resembles precisely that which is
produced by pouring salt in powder upon a part of the muscular system.
Then, although there may be in all the muscles, an internal motion
infinitely more sensible than in the great contractions, yet the
limbs are displaced but little, there are hardly any motions of the
whole muscles, they are but slight jars. 4th. There are other modes
of contraction less sensible than these, but which however exhibit
differences. In general, to each species of motion of the muscle
is adapted a particular manner of contracting; if we make but few
experiments on living animals, we may easily be convinced how much the
most judicious authors have been mistaken upon this point.

Two modes of contraction are often combined; for example, when we cut
a muscle transversely in a living animal, there is at first a slow
contraction of the whole, produced by the contractility of texture,
then partial oscillations in all the divided fibres; now these
oscillations are foreign to the retraction which takes place without
them, often in the living animal and always in the dead body. So the
oscillations can be combined with the sudden contraction arising
from the nervous influence by the act of the will, or they may be
disconnected with it, as happens almost always when the animal is in
full life. We may be convinced of this last fact without recourse to
experiments, by placing the hand upon the masseter muscle or the biceps
of a thin person when they are contracting; we do not feel in them
through the skin any motion analogous to these oscillations.


V. _Motions imparted by the Muscle._

Every muscular motion is either simple or compound. Let us now speak of
the first; by it we shall understand the second.


_Simple Motion._

It must be considered, 1st, in the muscles with a straight direction;
2d, in those in a reflected one; 3d, in those in a circular one.

In the first, as in those of the extremities, the trunk, &c. if they
are of an elongated form, and as they terminate by a tendon, each
fibre contracting draws this tendon from its place; whence it follows
that all act together to bring it towards the centre of the muscle, but
at the same time each of them tends to give it another direction, and
in this respect they are antagonists. The common motion remains; the
opposite is destroyed.

Every effort of contraction in the long muscles is concentrated upon
a single point, the tendon. In most of the broad muscles, on the
contrary, the attachments being made at two sides by different points,
all the fibres do not contribute to the same end. Thus the different
parts of the same muscle can have very different and even opposite
uses; thus the inferior portion of the great serratus does not act like
the superior; often even the different portions of the same muscle do
not contract at the same time. In a long muscle, on the contrary, as
all the fibres contribute to produce the same effect, they always act
simultaneously.

To estimate the effect which a muscle in the straight direction
produces upon the bones in which it is inserted, different means
are employed. A very simple one appears to be that, which I believe
has never been mentioned. It consists in examining the direction
of the muscle from its fixed to its moveable point, and in taking
the inverse of this direction; this last is always the direction of
the motion. Do you wish to know how the anterior radial acts upon
the wrist; take it at its insertion at the condyle, then follow its
direction downwards and outwards; you will see that it carries the
hand upwards and inwards, that it bends it and places it a little in
adduction. The tibialis anticus directed downwards and inwards raises
the foot and carries it outwards. The anterior rectus of the thigh
going straight from the pelvis to the patella, raises the leg directly
up. All the other muscles will exhibit this arrangement. Whatever
may be the attachment of their fixed or moveable point, they always
act inversely to the supposed line of direction going from the first
point; and as each attachment can be alternately moveable or fixed, the
two bones which serve them are carried in an opposite direction; the
coraco-brachialis directed downwards and outwards from the shoulder
towards the arm, carries this last upwards and inwards; directed
from below upwards and from without inwards from the arm towards the
shoulder, it moves this downwards and outwards. By this general rule,
it is sufficient to see a muscle in a dead body, to pronounce upon its
uses.

When the whole of a broad muscle is united at a common point, as the
deltoid which having many points of attachment above, is fixed below in
a single tendon, the middle line of direction of all its fibres should
be taken to estimate its uses.

When a muscle is attached by its two extremities at many points, and
consequently the fibres that compose it, form many fasciculi with
different directions and insulated motions, the line of direction of
each fasciculus must be examined in order to estimate the action of
the muscle. It is thus that we should study that of the trapezius, the
great serratus, the rhomboid, &c.

In the muscles with reflected direction, as the great oblique of the
eye, the lateral peronei, the circumflexus, &c. the action of the
muscle should only be estimated by the point of reflection; thus the
great oblique carries the eye inwards, though its fleshy portion
contracts so as to carry the moveable point backwards.

The orbicular muscles, those placed around the lips, the eyes, the
anus, &c. have in general no fixed or moveable points; they are not
designed to approximate two parts to each other, but only to contract
the opening around which they are situated. The anus is shut by its
sphincter, when the excrements do not dilate it. The mouth remains
closed, when the depressors, the elevators or the abductors of the
lips are inactive. The eye is shut, when the elevator of the superior
eye-lid is relaxed. I would remark upon this subject that the inferior
eye-lid having no depressor, it is principally the other which
contributes to shut or open the eye; and as its muscle cannot be in
permanent contraction, the alterations of its relaxations produce those
continual winkings which take place when the eye is open; they are to
the eye what the alternate change of the weight of the body from one
leg to the other is in long standing without motion. At every instant
the muscle relaxes; the sphincter acts immediately; then it contracts
and distends the sphincter; winking then is a continual struggle
between the elevator of the eye-lid and the orbicularis. In sleep, it
is not by the contraction of this that the eye is shut; it is relaxed
like all the muscles; it is because the elevator is inactive, that the
eye-lid falls by its own weight upon the eye; it communicates as it
were the motion to the orbicularis that it shuts up, whilst, during
the day, it is the orbicularis on the contrary that communicates this
motion to it.


_Compound Motions._

There are but few motions in the economy that are simple, but few
muscles that can contract separately. Almost every sort of contraction
supposes another, and for this reason; the two points to which a muscle
is ordinarily attached are both capable of being moved; if one of
them was not fixed, both would then be put in motion when the muscle
contracted; thus in the contraction of its extensors, the leg if it
was not fixed would approach the foot as much as the foot approached
the leg; now it could not be fixed but by the muscles which act in an
opposite direction to the effect which the extensors tend to produce
upon it; then whenever the two attachments of a muscle are moveable,
the insulated motion of one of them supposes the contraction of
different muscles to fix the other.

It is only those muscles that are attached on one side to a fixed point
and on the other to a moveable one, like those of the eye, and most of
those of the face, that can move in an insulated manner, and without
requiring a motion in the other muscles. It should be remarked however
that in general the contractions destined to fix the point which should
be immoveable in the ordinary motions, are less than they at first
seem to be. In fact, in these ordinary motions, the point which moves
is always the most moveable, that which remains without motion is the
least so; for example, it requires a much greater effort in flexors
to bend the arm upon the fore-arm, than to bend the phalanges upon
the fore-arm, or the fore-arm upon the arm. By supposing their two
attachments moveable, the gemelli would act much more powerfully on
the foot than on the femur, &c. In the extremities, the superior point
is always more moveable than the inferior, now it is this which almost
always moves, the other being fixed; then as it offers more resistance
by its position, it requires less effort of the muscular powers to
retain it. It is only in violent motions, that the previous contraction
of the muscles destined to fix one of the points of insertion Is very
painful. This takes place on the chest when the trapezius, the great
serratus and the great pectoral contract powerfully; then all the other
muscles of this cavity contract strongly to dilate it, and thus offer
a broader and more fixed attachment to those muscles, which move the
shoulder in the support of burdens, or in any other analogous effort.
The diaphragm contracts also; hence hernias, the descents which take
place from a concussion in those motions which, at first view, have no
analogy with the abdominal cavity. When in a horizontal position of the
body we raise the head, the rectimuscles of the abdomen contract to
fix the chest, and present a solid point to the sterno-mastoideus, &c.

We call especially a compound motion that which two or more muscles,
acting upon the same point, contribute simultaneously to produce. In
this case, the moveable point follows the direction of neither muscle,
if there are two of them, but takes the diagonal of their direction.
It is thus that the eye is moved outwards and upwards, outwards and
downwards, &c.; that the head is depressed, that it is carried to
one side, and that the arm is applied to the trunk, &c. In general
nature has distributed muscles only in some principal directions
around a moveable point, for example around the eye, in those of
elevation, depression, adduction and abduction; the combination of
these simple motions produces the compound ones. If the adductor and
depressor contract equally, the eye will be carried exactly in a middle
direction; if one acts with more force than the other, it will be
carried a little nearer the other; so that the four muscles, by moving
separately, or two by two in an equal manner, carry the eye in eight
different directions. In all the intermediate directions, there is also
a simultaneous action of two muscles, but always a superiority in the
action of one of them. Thus almost all the motions of circumduction
operate.

When two opposite muscles contract, the moveable part is not moved;
they are perfect antagonists. When two muscles which contract at
the same time are placed in the same direction, there is no loss
of power; this is what takes place when the genio-hyoideus and the
mylo-hyoideus depress the jaw or elevate the os hyoides; these muscles
act completely together. But when two muscles are in part opposed and
in part in the same direction, as the sterno-mastoidei, one portion
of the forces is destroyed and the other remains. The action by which
the sterno-mastoidei tend to carry the head to the right or the left,
is nothing; that alone by which they direct it downwards produces its
effect which is double, considering the action of the two muscles,
which are thus at the same time acting together and antagonists.
Hence we see that this applies not only to the motion produced by the
contractility of texture, but also very often to those which the animal
contractility occasions.


VI. _Phenomena of the Relaxation of the Muscles._

When a muscle ceases to contract, it becomes the seat of phenomena
precisely opposite to the preceding, which it is sufficient to know in
order to understand these. The muscle becomes longer and softer; its
wrinkles disappear; it returns exactly to the state in which it was
found. It is needless to give in detail the series of these phenomena.

I would remark that in the state of relaxation of the muscles, the
parts often execute motions which are only owing to their weight; such
are the flexion forwards of the head in sleep, the fall of the fore-arm
and the arm in the same case. Then the weight is often opposed to the
limbs, remaining in their middle position, which are not supported. We
see particularly these phenomena in paralysis.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

The muscular system exhibits great differences, according as we examine
it before the completion of growth, or in the ages that follow that in
which this growth is terminated.


I. _State of the Muscular System in the Fœtus._

In the first month of the fœtus, this system is, like the others, a
mere mucous homogeneous mass, in which can be distinguished scarcely
any line of demarcation. Aponeuroses, muscles, tendons, &c. all have
the same appearance. Gradually the limits are established, the muscular
texture at first takes a deeper tinge, from the blood that enters it.
Yet this tinge is at first much less evident than in the adult; it
remains nearly the same till birth. If we make use of the bones as a
means of comparison, this becomes striking. In the adult the interior
of the bones is less red than the muscular texture; the difference is
remarkable. It is the contrary in the fœtus; much more blood penetrates
the already ossified portion of the bones, than the interior of the
muscles. Nature distributes the blood in an inverse manner at these two
periods of life in these two systems.

I presume that this phenomenon is principally owing to the kind of
inertia in which the muscles remain before birth. Observe in fact
that though some motions announce in the last months the presence of
the fœtus in the womb of the mother, yet these motions are infinitely
less than they are to be afterwards. The proof of this is the constant
semi-flexed position which the limbs and trunk have, and the small
space that there is to execute these motions in, especially in the last
periods in which the waters are wonderfully diminished. In the early
periods of pregnancy, though the space may be greater, by opening the
females of animals, we constantly find the fœtus drawn up upon itself,
and in an attitude almost immoveable.

Many respectable philosophers have found the muscles of the chick in
its shell much less irritable than after birth, either by ordinary
agents, or by galvanic influence. I have made the same experiment
upon small guinea-pigs that were never born, by irritating directly
their muscles, or by stimulating their nerves, their spinal marrow and
the brain. The nearer we approach the term of conception, the less
are the motions obtained. That which is especially remarkable is the
rapidity with which, when the fœtus is dead, the muscles lose their
irritability; the instant that extinguishes life seems to destroy
this property. In the latter periods that precede accouchement, it is
a little more permanent, and more susceptible of being brought into
action, but always less than after birth. We can hardly doubt then
that the motions are less at this age, though however they exist. We
shall see that the nutrition, size and redness of the muscles are in
general in the adult in proportion to the number of the motions they
perform; it is not then astonishing that less blood penetrates them in
the fœtus. Besides the nearer we approach the period of conception,
the less abundant is this fluid in them. I have had occasion to make
this remark on guinea-pigs killed at different periods of gestation. In
the early periods, the muscles of the small ones really resemble those
of frogs; white like them, they are marked with reddish lines, which
indicate the course of the vessels.

I presume also that the kind of blood which circulates at this age
in the arteries and which penetrates the muscles, is less proper to
support and develop their mobility. In fact it is the black blood that
then enters the muscles by the vessels. We know that in the adult,
whenever this blood circulates preternaturally in the arterial system,
life is altered, the muscular motion is weakened, and soon asphyxia
comes on. It is to the nature and the colour of the blood of the fœtus,
that must be attributed the livid and often deep tinge that its muscles
exhibit; for this is also a character that distinguishes them from
those of the adult. Not only their colour is less evident and they
are paler, but their tinge is wholly different; and this tinge has
uniformly the character of that of the fœtus before it has respired.

The muscles are slender, but little developed in the fœtus. Their
development is infinitely less than that of the muscles of organic
life. The size of the limbs arises especially from their sub-cutaneous
fat. When this fat is in small quantity, and we compare the limbs
with the trunk, they are much less in proportion than they will be
afterwards. In the fœtuses that have much cutaneous fat, from whom
we remove all the skin, we also see this disproportion of size. We
know that at this age all the cavities of muscular insertion, all the
apophyses destined to the same use, are almost nothing. The parietes
of the temporal fossa, for example, more curved outward, enlarge the
cerebral space, and contract that which the temporal muscle fills. This
is a small anatomical fact which is the consequence of a great law of
nutrition, viz. of the predominance of the nervous system to which the
brain belongs, over the animal muscular, in respect to development. Let
us remark that this predominance, whence arises at this age an evident
disproportion between the muscular and nervous systems, when compared
to what they will be afterwards, would alone prove that the muscles are
not, as has been said, a termination and expansion of the nerves; in
fact two species of organs whose development is inverse, cannot belong
to one and the same system.

Many authors have pretended that the fleshy portion was in proportion
much more developed in the fœtus than the tendinous, that this even
did not exist. I cannot imagine whence this opinion arose. It may be
conceived that they have thought that the aponeuroses of the limbs
were wanting in the first months; I have uniformly observed that they
have not then that white colour which characterizes them afterwards,
a colour that they only take when their fibres are developed; they
are transparent, like a serous membrane, and cannot at first sight
be perceived. But the tendons have a very evident white colour; we
distinguish them very well; they are quite as large and as long in
proportion as they will be afterwards.


II. _State of the Muscular System during Growth._

At birth, the muscular system of animal life experiences, like all the
others, a remarkable revolution. Until then black blood only penetrated
its arteries; then the red blood immediately enters them; for this
blood is formed when respiration takes place; now this takes place in
almost all its perfection at the very instant the fœtus leaves the womb
of the mother. We evidently see besides that the livid tinge of the
skin gives place almost immediately to a red colour, which arises from
this difference of the blood. This new fluid entering the muscles, is a
new cause of excitement, and consequently of motion. Add to this cause
the sudden increase of cerebral action. Till then, the brain penetrated
with black blood, was as in a kind of inertia, which was principally
owing also to the absence of sensations, as I have elsewhere proved.
Suddenly the red blood enters it; it stimulates it either by the
principles that it contains, or because it was different from that
which had penetrated it; for such is the nature of sensibility that it
is capable of being affected in an organ, merely because the stimulus
that is applied to it is new. Suddenly excited by the red blood, the
brain re-acts upon the muscles, and determines them to contract. This
cause, joined to the preceding, appears to me to be one of those which
have the most influence on the sudden disappearance of the kind of
inertia in which the fœtus was, or at least of the small degree of
motion that it performed, by the general agitation of its limbs, its
abdomen, chest, face, &c.; for immediately after birth all the muscles
are moved more or less strongly.

Let us not, however, exaggerate the influence of a cause which is
certainly not the only one; for example, the motions of the diaphragm
and the pectoral muscles, are certainly prior to the entrance of
the red blood in the brain, since their action is necessary to the
production of this red blood. These muscles enter into action, because
the excitement of the air on the whole exterior of the body, and on
the mucous membranes in contact with this fluid, stimulates the brain
which is the centre of all sensation. Moved by this excitement, this
organ re-acts upon the muscles, and begins to make them contract. The
contractions increase, when to this external and indirect excitement is
added the internal and direct excitement of which we have just spoken.
This second excitement is not absolutely necessary for the fœtus, for
we often see infants that remain livid some instants after birth, move
very well; but in general the motions are not so decided as when the
red colour of the skin indicates the entrance of the arterial blood,
which has undergone the influence of respiration.

The entrance of the red blood into the muscles does not give them
immediately the colour they will afterwards have. For some time after
birth, they have a deep tinge, as dissections clearly prove, because,
as I have said, their colour does not come from the colouring portion
circulating in their texture, but from that combined with this texture.
Now nutrition alone produces the combination; but this function takes
place gradually; it is truly a chronic function, in comparison with
exhalation, absorption, and the circulation, which are evidently rapid
in their progress.

As we advance in age, the muscles assume a redder tinge; more blood
penetrates them; they are nourished in proportion more than various
other organs. This is particularly remarkable in those of the lower
extremities. I would remark, however, that as long as growth continues,
it is especially upon the length and not upon the thickness of the
muscles, that the energy of nutrition is carried. Hence why they are
but slightly visible through the integuments and are scarcely at all
prominent; why their forms are rounder and more graceful, but less
masculine at this age. The exterior of a young man is in this respect
wholly different from that of the adult, by considering each, separate
from every cause that can have an influence upon their conformation.
The external appearance of the infant and the young man is in general
very analogous to that of woman.

Though we do not know so well the difference of the substances which
penetrate the muscles in the first years and in the adult age, as we
know it in the bones in which the addition of the phosphate of lime
to gelatine exhibits a very striking phenomenon, yet we cannot doubt
that these differences really exist. Treated by ebullition, combustion,
maceration, &c. the flesh of the fœtus does not give the same results
as that of the adult.

The broth made with the muscles of a young animal contains much more
gelatine, a substance which greatly predominates at this period of
life. It has less flavour than that of adult animals. The extractive
substance consequently appears to be less. A mawkish, nauseous taste
characterizes broths made of veal. The difference of the principles
they contain has an influence even upon the gastric organs, of which
they excite the contraction; they loosen the belly, as it is called, a
phenomenon unknown to common broths. It does not appear that the fibrin
is in as great a proportion in the muscles at this period of life; the
following considerations make me think so.

1st. Instead of this substance, Fourcroy has found in the blood of the
fœtus a soft texture, without consistence, and like gelatine; now the
blood appears to be the reservoir of fibrin. 2d. The force and energy
of the contractions are in general in proportion to the quantity of
this principle contained in the muscles; now this energy is small in
the first age. 3d. The muscles burn then, and crisp and contract less
than in the adult. I have even two or three times seen their texture,
when placed upon live coals, become puffed up like gelatine treated in
the same way.

In general it appears that this last substance occupies in the muscles
the place the fibrous system is afterwards to hold in them. Those who
frequent dissecting rooms, have observed, no doubt, that other things
being equal, the muscles of young subjects putrify less quickly than
most other substances, and that when they do, they give out a less
fetid odour. We know that broth made of veal turns sour more easily
than that made of beef. It is always whitish, and never has the deep
colour of the broth made with this last. It becomes like jelly much
more easily. Young and old roast meats exhibit also great differences.
Every kind of stewing either by the fire alone, or in any fluid, is
much quicker and easier in the first age. The gravy that is then
extracted from the muscles has a character wholly different, it is less
strong. The effects of maceration are also more rapid; we obtain sooner
that mucous pulp, to which the action of water finally reduces almost
all animal substances.


III. _State of the Muscular System after Growth._

After general growth is finished in length, our organs then increase
in thickness; and it is especially in the muscles that this phenomenon
is remarkable. To the slender and delicate body and round forms of the
youth and young man, succeeds a large, strong and thick body with well
developed forms. The muscles can be traced through the integuments,
eminences and depressions are observed in them; different depressed
lines serve as limits to various prominent ones. The animal muscular
system is then more prominent in a state of repose, than it is in youth
in its greatest motions. Painters and sculptors have studied more than
anatomists the different degrees of the development of the muscles.

The period when the hairs grow, when the genital organs begin to become
active, is principally that in which the muscles begin to become
prominent in man. In woman, this last period does not present a similar
phenomenon; the muscles preserve the original roundness, they scarcely
ever lose it. In this sex, the roundness of the limbs, their agreeable
forms, make a contrast with the kind of rudeness of those of man.

The increase in thickness in the muscles appears to be much more
in the fleshy than the tendinous portion, and especially than the
aponeurotic. The intermuscular aponeuroses principally do not appear
to grow in proportion to the fibres that are inserted into them; so
that these make a prominence, and at the place of the aponeurosis there
is a depression. This is what we see very well in muscles cut for
their insertions by many of these fibrous expansions, in the deltoid
in particular. Not only the prominence through the skin of the whole
of the muscle, makes the depressions evident that separate it from
the others, but each fleshy bundle has a prominence which a groove
separates; this, it is true, is only distinguishable upon thin subjects.

As the muscle grows in thickness, it increases in density. It becomes
firmer and more resisting. If we place for comparison the hand upon
two similar muscles of an adult and an infant, whilst they are in
contraction, we feel a sensible difference in their hardness. Weights
suspended for comparison to the muscles of the two ages, taken in the
dead bodies, prove the different degree of their resistance. The
muscular texture of adults yields more slowly to all re-agents.

The colour of the muscles continues to be red in the adult; but in
general, and all things being equal in respect to the causes that make
this colour vary, it begins to become of a less bright red after the
thirtieth year. It is usually in the last years of growth, and even
from the tenth to the twentieth, that the colour is the most brilliant.

In the adult this colour exhibits a very remarkable phenomenon. All men
have their muscles red, but hardly two have the same shade. Those who
have opened many dead bodies are easily convinced of this; a residence
at the dissecting rooms proves this assertion. A thousand causes have
an influence upon this colour; the temperament is the principal. The
external appearance of the muscles without the skin indicates by
their shades of colour the temperament, as well as the integuments
do. Diseases make this colour vary wonderfully. All those that have
a chronic progress alter it remarkably; it then becomes pale, dull,
&c. Dropsies whiten it, when they are of long standing. In general,
every thing that has upon the powers of life a slow and debilitating
influence, diminishes the brightness of it. Acute diseases, whatever
may be their nature, change it but little. Fevers with the greatest
prostration, if they suddenly produce death, leave it untouched,
because this colour can only change by nutrition; now as this function
is slow in its phenomena, it is but little affected by acute diseases;
it is only at the end of some time that it feels the affections
reigning in the economy.

I would observe that the varieties of colour that are seen in the
muscles of adults, even in the healthy state, distinguish them
especially from those of the fœtus, which have in general an uniform
paleness. This difference is owing to the fact, that in the first
age, we are not subject to the action of the numerous agents which
modify, in an infinitely variable manner in the after ages, the great
functions, and of course nutrition which is the end of them. It is in
these varieties of colour of the muscular system of the adult, that
we clearly distinguish that the blood circulating in the arteries is
wholly foreign to it; in fact it is uniform, and never partakes of
those varieties of colour whatever they may be.

Many circumstances in the adult make the muscular nutrition vary;
motion is the principal. The man who passes his life at rest is
remarkable for the small prominence of his muscles, especially if we
compare this prominence with that of the muscles of a man who takes
great exercise. Not only general motion exhibits this phenomenon,
but also local motion, as we see in the arms of bakers, the legs of
dancers, the backs of porters, &c.


IV. _State of the Muscular System in Old Age._

In old age, the texture of the muscles changes remarkably; it becomes
resisting and stiff; the teeth tear it with difficulty. This too great
density is injurious to its contractions, which can now only take place
slowly; the action of the brain becomes less upon the muscles; the
continuance of their motions is not as long; they are sooner fatigued.

I would remark that the density of the muscles should not be confounded
with their cohesion. The first arises from substances that enter into
the composition of the muscle. Cohesion on the contrary appears to be
owing to vital influence, the effect of which is preserved after death.
Dissect the muscles of a strong and vigorous adult; the fleshy mass is
firm; it keeps in its place; it supports itself, though the scalpel
may have removed from it every surrounding texture. On the contrary
in a body dead of a chronic disease, in a dropsical or phthisical
subject, the muscles are loose and cannot support themselves; the
relations are destroyed when the surrounding texture is removed. The
first subjects are much more suitable for the dissection of myology
than the last. The muscular texture is in old subjects nearly as in
these last, flaccid and loose; we feel this flaccidity under the skin
in the solæus, the gemelli, the biceps, &c.; it does not prevent each
fibre from being dense and tough. In general the muscular cohesion is
in the inverse ratio of the age; the muscles of a young man are firm
and compact; they are not moveable under the skin. Towards the fortieth
year and afterwards, we begin to perceive more laxity; the calves of
the legs vacillate in great motions; the glutei and in general all
the prominent limbs exhibit also this vacillation, especially if the
individual is thin. The muscles become more and more susceptible of
moving thus, as we approach old age, a period in which the least motion
makes the whole muscular system vacillate. Why? Because the muscle is
no longer in sufficient contraction; it is as it were too long for the
space it fills. This appears to be owing to the circumstance that the
contractility of texture has diminished in the last age; we can be
convinced of this by cutting transversely for comparison a muscle in
an old man and a young one; it retracts more in fact in an opposite
direction in the second than in the first. This contractility of
texture approximates all the particles of the muscle when at rest; it
can no longer produce this approximation; the muscle remains loose.
Authors have not sufficiently observed this remarkable phenomenon which
the muscular system experiences from the progress of age, a phenomenon
which is really the index of its degree of contractile power.

Frequently in old age the muscular texture loses its colour and takes a
yellowish one and has a fatty appearance, though however this colour
does not arise from the fat, but from the absence of the colouring
substance of the blood. I have often made this remark. If we strip all
the surrounding fat from these pretended fatty muscles, and leave them
only their texture, combustion or ebullition extracts no animal oil
from them; they are in their fibrous state as usual; the colour only is
different. I have remarked that the deep muscles of the back and those
placed in the vertebral depressions are much more subject than all the
others to lose their colour and to exhibit this yellowish aspect, an
aspect that is rarely ever seen in the whole system, but only in some
insulated muscles. Adults are subject, though less frequently however,
than old people, to this alteration. Many times we see limbs that are
poorly nourished, with an aspect, nearly the same. In recent palsies,
in those even of three, four or six months, there is in general no
change in the limbs; the muscles preserve their colour and their size;
but at the end of a longer time, the absence of motion, perhaps also
the deficiency of nervous influx, terminate by altering the nutrition
left for a long time untouched without this influx, and then the
muscles change colour, contract and diminish. But this phenomenon is
not always constant, and there are at the Hôtel-Dieu hemiplegias of
six, seven and even ten years, without the limb of the sound side
predominating in its nutrition over that of the diseased one.

External pressures for a long time continued upon a muscle, produce
nearly the same effect as want of nourishment; they discolour and
whiten it by preventing the circulation in it. Those who make use of
straps constantly passed under the arms, who habitually have girdles
round the abdomen and who lift burdens, have often the muscles
corresponding to the constant pressure they experience, in the state
of those of old people. I would remark that these muscles contract
notwithstanding; which proves that the colouring substance is not of
absolute necessity to muscular action.

The blood is carried in general in much less quantity in the muscles of
old people; their vessels are in part obstructed; this is what disposes
them to the state of which I have just spoken.


V. _State of the Muscular System at Death._

At the instant of death, the muscles remain in two different states;
sometimes they are stiff and inflexible; sometimes they allow the limbs
to execute motions very easily. It is sometimes necessary to make an
effort to bend the thigh of a dead body; at others the least touch is
sufficient to do it, as for example in asphyxia, from charcoal. These
state of rigidity and relaxation have infinite degrees. The first is
sometimes so great, that the subject raised against a wall remains
standing; at other times it is nothing. Some muscles are stiff in
subjects, while others are relaxed. It appears that these different
states depend upon the kind of death, upon the phenomena that accompany
the last moments. But how do they precisely happen? It is an object
of interesting research. I have remarked that the muscles remaining
stiff at the instant of death, are often torn with ease, if we attempt
to force the motions of the limbs to which they go; that the tearing
hardly ever takes place on the contrary in those remaining supple,
whatever may be the impulse communicated at their moveable points; it
is necessary to draw them directly, attach weights to them, &c. to
produce this phenomenon, which is then easy.

The muscular texture is never preternaturally developed in the
different organs in which nature has not originally placed it, as
happens in the osseous, cartilaginous and even fibrous textures. If
it were developed, it would not belong to animal but to organic life;
because in order to depend upon the first, the cerebral nerves are
essentially necessary, the muscle being but the agent of the motions
which the latter communicate.


END OF VOL. II.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.

The various tables used curved braces to indicate groups.
For clarity these have been replaced by rectangular braces.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of General Anatomy, Applied to Physiology
and Medicine, Vol. 2 (of 3), by Xavier Bichat


, VOL 3 ***




Produced by Sonya Schermann, Les Galloway and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







                           GENERAL ANATOMY,

                              APPLIED TO

                       PHYSIOLOGY AND MEDICINE;

                           BY XAVIER BICHAT,

       PHYSICIAN OF THE GREAT HOSPITAL OF HUMANITY AT PARIS, AND
                 PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY.

                      Translated from the French.

                        BY GEORGE HAYWARD, M.D.

         FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES,
               AND OF THE MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL SOCIETY.

                       _IN THREE VOLUMES._

                             VOLUME III.

                            _BOSTON_:
                   PUBLISHED BY RICHARDSON AND LORD.

                       J. H. A. FROST, PRINTER.
                                 1822.




DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS, _to wit_:

  DISTRICT CLERK'S OFFICE.

BE IT REMEMBERED, that on the seventeenth day of April, A.D. 1822,
in the forty-sixth year of the Independence of the United States of
America, _Richardson & Lord_, of the said District, have deposited
in this office the title of a book, the right whereof they claim as
proprietors, in the words following, _to wit_:

"General Anatomy, applied to Physiology and Medicine; by Xavier Bichat,
Physician of the Great Hospital of Humanity at Paris, and Professor of
Anatomy and Physiology. Translated from the French, by George Hayward,
M. D. Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and of the
Massachusetts Medical Society. In three Volumes. Volume III."

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States,
entitled, "An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by securing the
Copies of Maps, Charts and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of
such Copies, during the times therein mentioned:" and also to an Act
entitled, "An Act supplementary to an Act, entitled, An Act for the
encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts and
Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies during the times
therein mentioned; and extending the Benefits thereof to the Arts of
Designing, Engraving and Etching Historical and other Prints."

  JOHN W. DAVIS,
  _Clerk of the District of Massachusetts._




MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.


This system is not as abundantly spread out in the economy as the
preceding. The whole mass which it forms, compared with the whole of
the other, which is more than one third of the body, presents in this
respect a very remarkable difference. Its position is also different;
it is concentrated, 1st, in the thorax, where the heart and œsophagus
belong to it; 2d, in the abdomen where the stomach and intestines are
in part formed by it; 3d, in the pelvis where it contributes to form
the bladder and even the womb, though this belongs to generation, which
is a function distinct from organic life. This system then occupies
the middle of the trunk, is foreign to the extremities, and is found
far from the action of external bodies, whilst the other superficially
situated, forming almost alone the extremities, seems, as we have said,
almost as much destined in the trunk to protect the other organs, as
to execute the different motions of the animal. The head contains no
part of the organic muscular system; this region of the body is wholly
devoted to the organs of animal life.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE FORMS OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

All the muscles of the preceding system take in general a straight
direction. These are all on the contrary curved upon themselves; all
represent muscular cavities differently turned, sometimes cylindrical
as in the intestines, sometimes conical as in the heart, sometimes
rounded as in the bladder, and sometimes very irregular as in the
stomach. No one is attached to the bones; all are destitute of
tendinous fibres. The white fibres arising from the internal surface of
the heart, and going to be attached to the valves of its ventricles,
have by no means the nature of the tendons. Ebullition does not easily
reduce them to gelatine; desiccation does not give them the yellowish
appearance of these organs; they resist maceration longer than them.

It is in general a great character that distinguishes the muscular
organic system from that of animal life, that it does not arise from,
nor terminate in fibrous organs. All the fibres of this last are
continuous either with tendons, or aponeuroses or fibrous membranes.
Almost all those of the first go on the contrary from the cellular
texture, and return to it after having run their course. I at first
thought that the dense and compact texture which is between the mucous
membrane and the fleshy fibres of the intestines, the bladder, the
stomach, &c. was an assemblage and net-work of many small tendons
corresponding to these fibres, and interwoven in the form of an
aponeurosis; the density of this layer deceived me at first view.
Ebullition, maceration, and desiccation have since taught me, that this
layer, completely foreign to the fibrous system, should be referred, as
Haller has said, to the cellular, which is only more dense and compact
there than elsewhere. It is this layer, which I have designated, in
the cellular system by the name of the sub-mucous texture. Many fibres
of the system of which we are treating appear to form an entire curve,
which is not crossed by any cellular intersection; some layers of the
heart exhibit this arrangement, which is in general very rare; so that
there is almost always an origin and termination of the fibres, upon an
organ of a nature different from their own.

We can hardly consider in a general manner the forms of the system of
which we are treating; each organ belonging to it is moulded upon the
form of the viscus to the formation of which it contributes. In fact,
the organic muscles do not exist in distinct fasciculi, like those of
animal life; all, except the heart, form but a third, a quarter and
often even less in the structure of a viscus.

The greatest number has a thin, flat and membranous form. There are
layers more or less broad, and hardly ever distinct fasciculi. Placed
at the side of each other, the fibres are rarely one above another;
hence it happens that occupying a very great extent, these muscles form
however a very small volume. The great gluteus alone would be larger
than all the fibres of the stomach, the intestines and the bladder, if
they were united like it into a thick and square muscle.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

The organization of the involuntary muscles is not as uniform as that
of the preceding. In these all is exactly similar excepting the
differences of the proportion of the fleshy fibres to the tendinous,
of the length of the first, of the prominence of the fasciculi,
of their assemblage into flat, long or short muscles; in whatever
place we examine them, their varieties are in their forms and not in
their texture. Here on the contrary, there is in this texture marked
differences; the heart compared with the stomach, the intestines with
the bladder are sufficient to convince us of this. It is by virtue of
these different textures, that the contractility and sensibility vary
as we shall see in each muscle, that the force of the contraction is
not the same, and that life is different in each, whilst it is uniform
in all those of animal life. We shall now consider in a general manner
the organization of the involuntary muscles.


I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization of the Muscular System of
Organic Life._

The organic muscular fibre is in general much finer and more delicate
than that of the preceding system; it is not brought into as thick
fasciculi. Very red in the heart, it is whitish in the gastric and
urinary organs. Besides, this colour varies remarkably. I have observed
that sometimes maceration renders it of a deep brown in the intestines.

This fibre never has one single direction, like that of the preceding
muscles; it is interlaced always, or found in juxta-position in
different directions; sometimes it is at a right angle that the
fasciculi are cut, as in the longitudinal and circular fibres of
the gastric tubes; sometimes it is with angles more or less obtuse
or acute, as in the stomach, the bladder, &c. In the heart, this
interlacing is such in the ventricles, that it is a true muscular
net-work. From these varieties of direction, results an advantage in
the motions of these sorts of muscles, which, being all hollow can by
contracting diminish according to many diameters the extent of their
cavity.

Every organic muscular fibre is in general short; those which, like
the longitudinal of the œsophagus, the rectum, &c. appear to run a
long course, are not continuous; they arise and terminate at short
distances, and thus arise and terminate successively in the same
direction or line; no one is comparable to those of the sartorius, the
gracilis, &c. as it respects length.

We know the nature of their fibres no better than that of those of
animal life; but they appear nearly the same under the action of the
different reagents. Desiccation, putrefaction, maceration, ebullition,
exhibit in them the same phenomena. I have observed upon the subject of
this last, that once boiled, the fibres of both systems are much less
alterable by the acids sufficiently weakened. After being some time in
the sulphuric, the muriatic and nitric diluted with water, they soften
a little, but keep their original form, and do not change into that
pulp to which raw fibres are always reduced in the same experiment. The
last of these acids turns them yellow as before ebullition.

I have also made an observation as it respects the horny hardening
which is produced the instant ebullition commences; it is this, that it
is always the same whatever may have been the antecedent dilatation or
contraction of the fibres. The stomach which at death was so dilated
as to contain many pints of fluid, is reduced to the same size, all
other things being equal, as that which is contracted so as to be no
larger than the cœcum. Diseases have a little influence on the horny
hardening. The heart of a phthisical patient exhibited to me in the
same experiment this phenomenon much less evidently, than that of an
apoplectic.

The resistance of the organic muscular fibre is in proportion much
greater than that of the fibres of the animal muscular system.
Whatever may be the distension of the hollow muscles by the fluid which
fills them during life, ruptures hardly ever take place in them.

The bladder alone sometimes exhibits this phenomenon, which is
however very rare in it. In the great retentions of the urine, in
which ruptures take place, it is almost always the urethra that is
ruptured, and the bladder remains whole. We meet in practice with a
hundred fistulas in the perineum, coming from the membranous portion,
to one above the pubis. We find in authors many examples of rupture of
the diaphragm; we know of but few of the rupture of the stomach, the
intestines and the heart.


II. _Common Parts in the Organization of the Muscular System of Organic
Life._

The cellular texture is in general much more rare in the organic
muscles than in the others. The fibres of the heart are in
juxta-position, rather than united by this texture. It is a little more
evident in the gastric and urinary muscles. It is almost wanting in the
womb; thus these muscles are not infiltrated, like the preceding, in
dropsies; they never exhibit that fatty state of which we have spoken,
and which sometimes loads the fibres. I have not observed in these
fibres the yellowish tinge which the others often take, especially in
the vertebral depressions.

The blood vessels are very numerous in this system; they are found
in it even in greater proportion than in the other; more blood
consequently penetrates them. This fact is remarkable, especially in
the intestines, in which the mesenteric arteries distribute numerous
branches, over an extremely delicate fleshy surface. But I would remark
that this appearance is to a certain degree deceptive, as many of these
vessels only traverse the fleshy surface to go to the mucous membrane.
In the ordinary state they give to the gastric viscera a reddish tinge,
which I have rendered at will livid and afterwards brought back to
its primitive state, by shutting and afterwards opening the stop-cock
adapted to the wind pipe, in my experiments upon asphyxia.

The absorbents and exhalants have nothing peculiar in this system.

The nerves come to them from two sources; 1st, from the cerebral
system; 2d, from that of the ganglions.

Except in the stomach in which the par vagum is distributed, the nerves
of the ganglions predominate everywhere. In the heart, they are the
principal; in the intestines, they are the only ones; at the extremity
of the rectum and the bladder, their proportion is greater than that of
the nerves coming from the spine.

The cerebral nerves intermix with them, in penetrating the organic
muscles. The cardiac, solar, hypogastric, plexuses, &c. result from
this intermixture which appears to have an influence upon the motions,
though we are ignorant of the nature of this influence.

All the nerves of the ganglions which go to the organic muscles, do not
appear to be exclusively destined to them. A great number of filaments
belong only to the arteries; such is in fact their interlacing, that
they form, as we have seen, around these vessels a real nervous
membrane, superadded to their own, and exclusively destined to them.
I would compare this nervous envelope to the cellular envelope which
is also found around the arteries, and which is wholly distinct from
the surrounding cellular texture; thus it only has communications with
the nerves of the organic muscles, without being distributed to these
muscles. Besides as the nerves of the ganglions are always the most
numerous and essential in them, and as their tenuity is extreme, the
nervous mass destined to each is infinitely inferior to that which
is found in the voluntary muscles. The heart and the deltoid muscle
compared together, exhibit in this respect a remarkable difference.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

Under the relation of properties, this system is in part analogous to
the preceding, and in part very different from it.


I. _Properties of Texture. Extensibility._

Extensibility is very evident in the organic muscles. The dilatation of
the intestines and the stomach by aliments, by the extrication of gas,
by the fluids that are found there, that of the bladder by the urine,
by injections that are forced in, &c. are essentially owing to this
extensibility.

This property is characterized here by two remarkable attributes; 1st,
by the rapidity with which it can be put into action; 2d, by the very
great extent of which it is susceptible.

The stomach and intestines pass in an instant from complete vacuity
to great extension. Artificially distended, the bladder becomes
immediately of a size treble, quadruple even of that which is natural
to it. It sometimes however resists, but this does not prove its
defect of extensibility; it is because the fluid injected irritates
it and makes it contract; the organic contractility in exercise, then
prevents the development of extensibility, as it sometimes cannot be
brought into action by stimulants in a muscle laid bare, because the
animal contractility in exercise in the muscle, forms an obstacle to
it. The muscles of animal life are never capable of this rapidity in
their extensibility, whether because they are intersected by numerous
aponeuroses which dilate but slowly, or whether because their layers
of fibres are very thick, two circumstances that do not exist in the
muscles of organic life. Hence a remarkable phenomenon that I have
observed in all cases of tympanites. When we open the abdomen of
subjects that have died in this state, without wounding the swelled
intestines, these immediately burst out, swell more, and occupy twice
as large a space as they were contained in in the abdomen; why? Because
the parietes of the abdomen being unable to yield in proportion to the
quantity of gas that is developed, this has been compressed in the
intestines during life, and expands immediately by its elasticity when
the cause of compression ceases. In dropsies in which the distension is
slow, the abdominal parietes enlarge much more than in tympanites. The
size of the abdomen would be double in this, if the extensibility of
the parietes was in proportion to that of the intestines.

As to the extent of the extensibility of the organic muscles, we can
form an idea of it by comparing the empty stomach which oftentimes
is not larger than the cæcum in its ordinary state, with the stomach
containing sometimes five, six and even eight pints of fluid; the
bladder contracted and concealed behind the pubis, with the bladder
full of urine from suppression, rising sometimes even above the
umbilicus; the rectum empty, with the rectum filling a part of the
pelvis in old people in whom the excrements have accumulated in it; the
intestines contracted with the intestines greatly distended.

It is to the extent of extensibility of the organic muscles and to the
limits placed to that of the abdominal parietes, that must be referred
a constant phenomenon that is observed in the gastric viscera; viz.
that in the natural series of their functions, they are never all
distended at the same time; the intestines are filled when the matters
contained in the stomach are evacuated; the bladder is not full of
urine in the digestive order, until the other hollow organs are empty,
&c. In general, that is an unnatural order in which all the organs are
distended at once.

There is for the organic muscles a mode of extensibility wholly
different from that of which I have just spoken; it is that of the
heart in aneurisms, and the womb in pregnancy. The first, for example,
acquires a size double, treble even sometimes in its left side, and yet
it increases at the same time in thickness. This size is not owing to
distension, but to a preternatural growth. The aneurismatic heart is
to the ordinary heart, what this is to the heart of the infant; it is
nutrition that makes the difference and not distension; for whenever
it is owing to this it diminishes in thickness as it increases in
extent; there is no addition of substance. Besides the aneurismatic
heart has not often the cause that distends it, for commonly in this
case the mitral valves allow a free passage to the blood; whilst when
they are ossified the left ventricle often remains in a natural state.
Moreover, the slow progress of the formation of aneurism proves that
it is a preternatural nutrition that has presided over this increase
of the heart. You would in vain then empty this organ of the blood
it contains, it would not contract and resume its dimensions, as the
inflated intestine does which we puncture to allow the air to escape.

In the womb there are two causes of distension; 1st, the sinuses
greatly developed; 2d, an addition of substance, a real momentary
increase of the fibres of the organ which remains as thick and even
more so than in the natural state. At the time of accouchement, the
sinuses immediately flatten by the contraction of the fibres; hence
the sudden contraction of the organ. But as on the one hand nutrition
alone can remove by decomposition the substances added to the fibres to
enlarge them, and as on the other, this function is exerted slowly,
after the womb has undergone the sudden contraction owing to the
flattening of its sinuses, it returns but gradually and at the end of
some time to its ordinary size. Extensibility is not then brought into
action in the womb filled by the fœtus, and in the aneurismatic heart;
these organs really become at that time the seat of a more active
nutrition; they grow preternaturally, as they have grown naturally
with the other organs; but these do not then experience an analogous
phenomenon, they become monstrous in comparison. The womb decreases,
because the motion of decomposition naturally predominates over that of
composition after accouchement, whilst it was the reverse before this
period. The aneurismatic heart remains always so.

These dilatations of the heart should be carefully distinguished from
those really produced by extensibility, as in the right auricle and
ventricle for example, which are found full of blood at the moment
of death, because the lungs which are weakened, not allowing it to
pass through them, compel it to flow back to the place from which it
came. There are but few hearts which do not exhibit in very various
degrees, these dilatations, which we have the power in a living
animal of increasing or diminishing at will, according to the kind of
death we produce. Two hearts are hardly ever of the same size after
death; many varieties are met with, and these depend more or less on
the difficulties which the blood experiences in the last moments,
in passing through the lungs. Hence why in the diseases of the
heart, there is no standard by which we can compare the morbid size,
especially if we examine the organ as a whole. In fact the distension
of the right side can give it an aneurismatic appearance, and a size
even greater than that of some aneurisms. If we examine the left side
separately, the error is more easily proved, because this side is
subject to less variations. But the principal difference consists
in the thickness. The power of contraction appears to increase in
proportion to this thickness, which arises from the substance added by
nutrition. It is this power which produces the great beating that is
felt under the ribs, the strength of the pulse, &c.


_Contractility._

It is in proportion to extensibility. It is often brought into action
in the ordinary state. It is in virtue of this property, that the
stomach, the bladder, the intestines, &c. contract, and acquire a size
so small compared to what they have when they are full. In general,
there is no muscle of animal life, which is capable of such extreme
contractions as those of organic life.

It should be remarked, however, that life, without having contractility
immediately dependant upon it, since the intestines, the stomach, and
the bladder contract after death when their distension is removed,
modifies it in a very evident manner. The causes even which alter
or diminish the vital forces have an influence upon it; hence the
following observation that all those accustomed to open dead bodies can
make. When the subject has died suddenly, and the stomach is empty, it
is much contracted; when, on the contrary, death has been preceded by a
long disease which has weakened its forces, the stomach, though empty,
remains flaccid, and is found but very little contracted.

We should consider the substances contained in the hollow muscles of
organic life, as true antagonists of these muscles; for they have
not muscles that act in a direction opposite to theirs. As long as
these antagonists distend them, they do not obey their contractility
of texture; when they are empty, this is brought into action. It is
not, however, upon this property that the mechanism of the expulsion
of matters from these organs turns, as aliments from the stomach and
intestines, urine from the bladder, blood from the heart, &c. It is
the organic contractility that presides over this mechanism. It is
difficult to distinguish these properties in exercise. One occasions
a slow and gradual contraction, which is without the alternation of
relaxation; the other, quick and sudden, consisting in a series of
relaxations and contractions, produces the peristaltic motion, those
of systole, diastole, &c. It is after the organic contractility has
procured the evacuation of the hollow muscles, that the contractility
of texture closes them. In death from hemorrhage from a great artery,
the left and even the right side of the heart send out all the blood
they contain; afterwards empty, they contract powerfully, and the
organ is very small. On the contrary, it is very large when much blood
remaining in its cavities, distends it, as in asphyxia. These are the
two extremes. There are, as I have said, many intermediate states.

The contractility of texture is, in the system of which we are
treating, in proportion to the number of fleshy fibres. Thus, all
things being equal, the rectum, when empty, contracts upon itself with
much more force than the other large intestines; the contraction of the
ventricles is much greater than that of the auricles, and that of the
œsophagus is much greater than that of the duodenum, &c. &c.


II. _Vital Properties._

They are almost in an inverse order of those of the preceding system.


_Properties of Animal Life. Sensibility._

The animal sensibility is slight in the organic muscles. We know
the observation related by Harvey upon a caries of the sternum that
laid bare the heart; they irritated, without its being felt by the
patient, this organ, which only contracted under the stimulant. Remove
the peritoneum behind the bladder of a living dog, and irritate the
subjacent muscular layer, the animal gives but few marks of pain. It
is difficult to make these experiments upon the intestines and the
stomach; their muscular coat is so delicate that we cannot act upon it
without at the same time stimulating the subjacent nerves.

It appears that the organic muscles are much less susceptible of the
feeling of lassitude, of which the preceding become the seat after
great exercise. I do not know however if in those to which many
cerebral nerves go, it does not take place; for example, when the
stomach has been for a long time contracted, it is probable that the
lassitude of its fibres, produces in part the painful sensation that
we then have, and which we call hunger, a sensation that should be
distinguished from the general affection that succeeds it, and which
becomes truly a disease, when abstinence has been too much prolonged.
We know that substances not nutritive then appease this sensation
without remedying the disease, when the stomach is filled with them.
I refer to the same kind of sensibility the anxiety and distress
which patients experience, in whom we keep the bladder in permanent
contraction by an open sound in the urethra, which transmits the urine
as fast as it falls from the ureters. This sensation does not resemble
that of hunger, because the sensibility of the bladder and that of
the stomach being different, their modifications cannot be the same.
Thus each of these two sensations is different from that of which the
muscles of animal life, for a long time contracted, become the seat. I
do not believe that the sensation of hunger belongs solely to the cause
I have pointed out, and which others have not spoken of; but it cannot
be denied that it has much part in it. Who knows if, after a fever in
which the action of the heart has been for a long time accelerated,
the weakness of the pulse which accompanies convalescence, is not a
sign of the lassitude in which its fleshy fibres are, on account of the
antecedent motion? We know the painful sensation of fatigue which the
stomach experiences after the contractions of vomiting.


_Contractility._

The animal contractility is foreign to the muscles of organic life.
To be convinced of this, we must recollect that on the one hand this
contractility always supposes the influence of the brain and the
nerves, to bring in play the action of the muscle, and that on the
other, the brain, in order to exert this influence, must be excited
by the will, by stimulants or by sympathies. Now none of these causes
acting upon the brain, the organic muscles cannot contract.

Every body knows that these muscles are essentially involuntary. If
some men have had the faculty of arresting the motions of the heart,
it is not upon this organ that the brain has acted; the action of the
diaphragm and the intercostals has first been suspended; respiration
has ceased for a time; then consequently the circulation.

If we irritate the brain with a scalpel or any other stimulant, the
muscles of animal life become convulsed; they are paralyzed if we
compress this organ. Those of organic life, on the contrary preserve in
both cases their natural degree of motion. The heart still continues
to beat, the intestines and stomach move some time after the cerebral
mass and spinal marrow have been taken away. Who does not know that
the circulation goes on very well in acephalous fœtuses; that after
the blow that has knocked down an animal, and rendered his whole
voluntary muscular system immoveable, the heart is still for a long
time agitated, the bladder rejects the urine, the rectum expels the
excrements, &c. the stomach even sometimes vomits up aliments? Opium,
which benumbs the whole animal life, because it acts especially
upon the brain which is the centre of it, which paralyzes all the
voluntary muscles, leaves the others unaffected in their contractions.
Intoxication produced by wine exhibits the same phenomenon. A man
staggers after drinking; his limbs refuse to carry him, and yet his
heart beats with force; his stomach often heaves and rejects the
surplus fluids it contains. All narcotic substances also produce this
effect.

If from experiments we pass to observations on the sick, we see that
all cerebral affections are foreign to the organic muscular system.
Wounds of the head with depression, fungi of the brain, effusions of
blood, pus and serum, apoplexy, &c. affect exclusively the voluntary
muscles, the action of which they increase, weaken or destroy. In the
midst of this general derangement of animal life, the organic remains
unaffected. The paroxysm of mania and malignant fever likewise proves
this fact. Who does not know that in this last the pulse is oftentimes
scarcely altered, that sometimes even it is slower?

Frequently in diseases of the head, there are spasmodic vomitings; the
action of the heart is accelerated in cerebral inflammations, &c. But
these are sympathetic phenomena which happen in the organic muscles, as
they do in all the other systems; they may not appear nor be developed;
a thousand irregularities are observed in their progress. Whereas
the contraction of the muscles of animal life by affections of the
brain is a constant, invariable phenomenon, which nothing disturbs,
and the development of which nothing prevents, because the means of
communication are always the same between the affected organ and the
one that moves.

If in the examination of the phenomena relative to the cerebral
influence upon the organic muscles, we follow an inverse order, that
is to say, that in the affections of these muscles we examine the
state of the brain, we observe the same independence; consider most
vomitings, the irregular motions of the intestines which take place in
diarrhœas, those especially which form the iliac passion, &c.; observe
the heart in the agitations of fevers, in the irregular palpitations
of which it becomes frequently the seat, &c.; in these derangements
of the organic muscles, you will very seldom find signs of lesions of
the cerebral organ; it is calm, while every thing is disordered in
organic life. Cullen thought that in syncope the action of the brain
ceased first, and that that of the heart was afterwards consequently
suspended. It is precisely the reverse in the greatest number of cases.
The heart, at first affected, ceases to act; now its action being
essential to that of the brain, whether from the motion it communicates
to it, or from the red blood it sends, the functions of this last are
suddenly suspended and the whole animal life ceases. This is remarkable
especially in the syncopes that arise from the passions, in those from
hemorrhages, polypi, great evacuations, &c. I refer upon this subject
to my Treatise upon Life and Death.

If from the influence of the brain we pass to that of the nerves, we
find new proofs of the absence of animal contractility in the organic
muscles. The most of these muscles receive, as we have seen, two
species of nerves, the one cerebral, the other from the ganglions.

The heart, the stomach, the rectum and the bladder are evidently
entered by the first species of nerves; now by cutting, or irritating
in any way the cardiac filaments of the par vagum, the heart
experiences no alteration from it; its motion is neither retarded, nor
accelerated. The division of both branches of the par vagum is fatal,
it is true, but not until after some days; and I doubt whether it is by
the heart that death commences in this case. The principal phenomena
consequent upon this division show a great embarrassment in the lungs,
a great difficulty of breathing; the circulation appears to be troubled
only in consequence.

The same nerves going to the stomach, the same experiment serves to
prove the cerebral influence upon this viscus. Now the division of that
of one side is usually nothing upon it; that of both soon produces a
remarkable derangement in it. But this derangement is wholly different
from that which follows the section of the nerve of a muscle of animal
life, which becomes suddenly immoveable, whilst that on the contrary
the stomach not communicating with the brain except by the par vagum,
seems to acquire in an instant an increase of power; it contracts
and hence the spasmodic vomitings that are almost always observed
during the two or three days that the animal survives the experiment,
vomitings that I have constantly noticed in dogs, and which Haller and
Cruikshank had before observed. It appears then from this, that though
the brain has a real influence upon the stomach, this influence is of
a nature wholly different from that which it exerts upon the voluntary
muscles. I would observe however that the irritation of one branch of
the par vagum, or of both, makes the stomach immediately contract,
as happens in a voluntary muscle when we irritate its nerve. It is
necessary, in order to make this experiment, to open the abdomen of a
living animal, and afterwards to irritate the eighth pair in the region
of the neck, so as to have in sight the organ that we make contract.

The bladder and the rectum appear to approximate the voluntary muscles,
in their relation with the brain, more than the stomach and the heart.
We know that falls on the sacrum, from which arises a shock of the
inferior part of the spinal marrow, produce retention of urine; that
they strike, as it were, this organ with the same paralysis as the
inferior extremities, which then also cease to move. Yet as the bladder
is very powerfully assisted in its functions by the abdominal muscles,
by the levator ani and other voluntary muscles which surround it, the
immobility of these muscles contributes much to the inability to
evacuate the urine. That which makes me think so, is that, 1st, the
irritation of the spinal marrow towards its inferior part which puts in
motion all the voluntary muscles of the inferior extremities and of the
pelvis, does not produce any effect upon this part. I have convinced
myself of this fact many times upon dogs and guinea-pigs. 2d. By
irritating the nerves coming from the sacral foramina and going to the
bladder, nerves that it is often very difficult to find, on account of
the blood in an animal recently killed, I have seen this muscle remain
immoveable. On the contrary all these nerves having been cut, the
injection of a fluid slightly stimulant makes it contract with force.
3d. In experiments upon living animals, as in surgical operations, the
violence of the pain which sometimes produces spasmodic contractions
of all the muscles of animal life, frequently occasions an involuntary
discharge of urine. Now in these cases it is not the bladder that
is convulsed; for if in an experiment this phenomenon takes place,
open the abdominal parietes, in an instant the flow of urine ceases,
because on the one hand the muscles of these parietes cannot act upon
the intestines and press them against the bladder, and because on the
other the levator ani which contracts and raises this organ, has no
resisting point against which it can compress it above. Observe in
fact that in strong jets of urine, the bladder is placed between two
opposite efforts, one superior, which is the gastric viscera pressed by
the diaphragm and the abdominal muscles, the other inferior, which is
especially the levator ani which acts by contracting from below above,
whilst the opposite effort acts from above below; now these two efforts
are evidently under the cerebral influence. I have very frequently
had occasion to observe the bladder full of urine in a living animal
whose abdomen was opened; I have never seen it contract with sufficient
violence to expel the fluid.

I do not deny but that the bladder, by the nerves it receives from the
sacral plexuses, is to a certain extent a voluntary muscle; but I say
that it is principally by forces accessory to its own and necessary
to its functions, that it is subjected to the will; that the animal
contractility is much greater in its functions than the sensible
organic contractility. How then is the urine retained in this organ,
or expelled from its cavity at will? In this way; when the urine falls
into the bladder, and is there on the one hand but a short time,
and on the other only in small quantity, it is not then an irritant
sufficiently powerful to produce the exercise of the sensible organic
contractility. The effort which the bladder makes is so small, that it
cannot overcome the resistance of the urethra, which being shut by the
contractility of texture, must be dilated by the impulse communicated
to the urine. In order to void this fluid, there must then be added
to the contraction of the bladder that of the surrounding voluntary
muscles; now the least effort of these muscles is sufficient to
overcome the resistance of the urethra. But if the urine is in great
quantity in the bladder, and it has acquired by remaining in it a
long time that deep colour which indicates the concentration of its
principles, then the irritation that it produces on the organ brings
powerfully into action the sensible organic contractility; the bladder
contracts, and in spite of the animal, there is an evacuation of urine.

In the rectum, in which the excrements have not a long canal, but only
a simple opening to pass, this is furnished with a sphincter which
is wanting in the urethra. This sphincter habitually closed must be
dilated by the impulse communicated to the excrements. When they are
in the rectum a short time and in small quantity, the sensible organic
contractility is not brought into action with sufficient power to expel
them; it requires the action of the neighbouring voluntary muscles.
If this action is not determined by the influx from the brain, the
excrements remain in the intestines; hence how, for some time, we
retain them at will. But as they increase in quantity, and become
more acrid by remaining and consequently more irritating, then the
sensible organic contractility strongly brought into action, empties
the intestine involuntarily. If the sphincter, which is voluntary, is
paralyzed, there will be incontinence, because no resistance is opposed
to the tendency of the rectum to contract, a tendency which though
feeble as long as it is but partly filled, is however always real.

From what we have said, it appears evidently that the bladder and
rectum, though receiving cerebral nerves, are yet less influenced by
the brain than it at first view appears, and that there is evidently
between them and the voluntary muscles a very great difference. They
are not mixt, as it is called; they approach the organic muscles
infinitely nearer than the others; I doubt even whether if no accessory
power acted with and compressed them, the mind could by the nerves
which come from the sacral plexuses, make them contract at will. I have
never seen an animal void his excrements when the abdomen was open.

Let us conclude from all that has been thus far said, that the cerebral
nerves which go to the organic muscles have upon them an influence
which by no means resembles that of the cerebral nerves going to the
muscles of animal life. I am ignorant moreover of the nature of this
influence.

All the organic muscles receive nerves from the ganglions, both the
preceding ones which are also penetrated by the cerebral nerves, and
the small intestines, and the cœcum, colour, &c. which are exclusively
pervaded by them. Now by cutting, tying or irritating in any manner
these nerves, by stimulating the ganglions from which they go, by
destroying or burning them with a concentrated acid or alkali, the
muscle remains in its natural state; its contractions are neither
accelerated nor retarded.

I have not been contented with ordinary agents in convincing myself
of the deficiency of real action of the nerves upon the organic
muscles; a fact, which all good physiologists have always admitted,
notwithstanding the opinions hazarded by some physicians who apply the
vague term of nervous influence to organs which are not susceptible of
it.

I have then employed galvanism, and I am convinced that it has very
little, almost no power, in putting into action muscular contractions
in organic life, whilst it is the most powerful agent in animal life.
I shall not here relate my experiments upon this subject; they will be
read in my Researches upon Death.

We can conclude from all that precedes, that the cerebral and nervous
influence upon the organic muscles is not known to us; that it does
not act as upon the voluntary muscles. It is however real to a certain
extent, since it is necessary that the nerves which enter into the
composition of these muscles should be of some use; but we are ignorant
of this use.


_Organic Properties._

The organic sensibility is strongly characterized in the muscles of
which we are treating. Before the sensible organic contractility is
developed in them, it is necessary that this should be put in action.
But as these two properties are not separated, as in their exercise
they always succeed each other, what we are going to say of sensible
organic contractility will apply also to the sensibility of the same
nature.

Insensible organic contractility or tone, exists in the muscular
system, to a degree necessary for its nutrition; but it does not
exhibit in it any thing peculiar.

It is the sensible organic contractility that is the predominant
property in this system, all the functions of which rest almost
entirely upon this contractility, as all the functions of the preceding
muscular system are derived as it were from the animal contractility.
We shall now examine more in detail this essential property, with
regard to which physiology owes so much to the illustrious Haller. We
can consider it in three relations; 1st, in the stimuli; 2d, in the
organs; 3d, in the action of the first upon the second.


_Of the Sensible Organic Contractility considered in relation to
Stimuli._

Stimuli are natural or artificial. The action of the first is continual
during life; upon them turn in part the organic phenomena; they place
in action the muscles, which without them would be immoveable; they are
as it were to these organs what pendulums are to our machines; they
give the impulse. The second can hardly have effect until after death,
or in our experiments.


_Natural Stimuli._

These stimuli are blood for the heart, urine for the bladder, aliments
and excrements for the gastric organs. Every organic muscle has a body,
which, habitually in contact with it, supports its motions, as every
animal muscle habitually in relation with the brain, borrows from it
its power of motion. The natural stimuli support the organs at the
same degree of mobility while they remain the same. All things being
equal on the part of the organs, the pulse does not vary, the digestive
periods continue for the same length of time, the intervals between
the excretion of urine are equal, whilst the blood, the chyle or the
urine exhibit no differences. But as these substances experience an
infinite number of varieties, the organs preserving the same degree of
sensibility, have yet frequent changes in their motion.

At the instant chyle enters the blood during digestion, the pulse
changes, because the heart is differently irritated. We observe the
same phenomenon under different circumstances; 1st, in re-absorptions
in which pus goes into the mass of blood; 2d, in the injection of
different fluids in the veins, injections that were so frequently
made in the last age, at the period of experiments upon transfusion,
and which I have also had occasion to make with other views which I
shall mention; 3d, in inflammatory diseases in which the blood takes a
peculiar character that is yet but little known, and which occasions
the formation of the pleuritic buff; 4th, in various other affections,
in which the nature of this fluid is remarkably altered; 5th, in the
passage of the red blood into the system with black blood. I have
observed that in putting a curved tube into the carotid of one side
and the jugular of the opposite of a large dog, so that one forces
blood into the other, the passage of the red blood into the veins is
not fatal like that of the black blood into the arteries; but there is
almost always at first an acceleration of the motions of the heart.

The influence of the degeneracy of the fluids in diseases has no doubt
been exaggerated; too frequent a source of morbid derangements has
been placed in this portion of the economy. But it cannot be denied,
that according to the different alterations that the fluids exhibit,
they may be capable of exciting differently the solids that contain
them. We know that in the same individual, and with the same mass of
aliments, digestion varies from one day to another in the duration of
its periods; that some aliments prolong and others accelerate it; that
some remain very long in the stomach, as it is said, and others as it
were only pass through it. Now in all these cases the organ remains
the same, the fluid only varies. According as the kidney secretes
urine more or less acrid and consequently more or less irritating, the
bladder retains it for a longer or shorter time. Such is oftentimes
its stimulating qualities, that the moment it comes into this organ
it is involuntarily rejected. Shall I speak of emetics and evacuants
by the intestinal canal, the effects of which are so variable? We
know that the words drastic, purgative, laxative, &c. indicate the
different degrees of the stimulating qualities which certain substances
introduced into the alimentary canal exhibit, degrees which are to be
considered abstractedly from those of the sensibility of the organs;
this in fact can be such, that a laxative may produce greater effects
than a drastic purge.

Not only the quality, but also the quantity of the fluids contained in
the organic muscles, has an influence upon their contractility. 1st.
The word plethora is certainly employed too loosely in medicine; but we
cannot doubt that the state which it expresses sometimes exists; now
the more blood there is in the heart, the more are its contractions
accelerated. 2d. I have many times made transfusion in dogs, whether
with a view to that alone, or in researches relative to respiration
and circulation. Now I have always observed, that by not opening a
vein, to empty the blood as fast as the external jugular receives it
(for I always choose this vein for the experiment) by thus producing
consequently an artificial plethora, I have, I say, always observed
that the motion of the heart was accelerated. I have even seen the
eye of a dog become bright and as it were inflamed; in others this
phenomenon has not been observed. 3d. We know that in running, in
which all the muscles by contracting press out from all sides the
venous blood contained in their texture, this which enters the heart in
abundance, makes it palpitate powerfully. 4th. There is not doubt but
that the quantity of urine and excrements as much and more than their
quality, is for the bladder and the rectum, a cause of involuntary
contraction. 5th. We know the serious consequences that arise from
giving emetics and cathartics in too large doses. 6th. A glass of tepid
water often does not produce vomiting when a pint will bring it on
powerfully, &c. &c.


_Artificial Stimuli._

The artificial stimuli are in general all the bodies in nature. Such
is in fact the essence of organic contractility, that a muscle because
it is in contact with a body to which it is not accustomed, instantly
contracts. If the muscles are not irritated by the organs that surround
them and with which they are in relation, it is because habit has
blunted the sensation which arises from this relation. But when these
organs change their modifications, when extracted from the body of the
animal, they become cold, and are afterwards applied to the organic
muscles laid bare, they will make them contract.

Caloric, by its absence which constitutes cold, as by its presence from
which arises heat, can equally excite the muscles and in general all
the organs. At the instant we open the thorax or the pericardium of a
living animal, the heart is agitated with a suddenly increased force;
it is because the air acts upon it, and it passes from the temperature
of the body to another which is different. All the aeriform fluids,
light, all fluids, &c. are stimuli of the muscles. If we see the heart
emptied of blood, the stomach and intestines deprived of the substances
that ordinarily enter them, contract with more or less force when they
have been taken out of the body, it is because the surrounding medium,
and the substances with which it is charged, contribute to produce this
effect; they are then the stimuli of these organs.

In general the artificial stimuli act in different ways; 1st, by their
simple contact; 2d, by tearing or cutting mechanically the fibres; 3d,
by tending to combine with them; 4th, there are some of whose mode of
action we are completely ignorant; such for example is electricity.

When the stimuli act only by simple contact, the fluids are, all things
being equal, more efficacious than the solids, because they stimulate
by a greater number of points; as they irritate not only the surfaces
of the organ, but penetrate also into the interstices of the fibres.
The solids produce an effect in proportion to the extent of their
excitement, to the greater or less pressure that they exert, to their
density, their softness, &c. They are almost always fluid substances
that nature employs for stimuli in the ordinary state.

Tearing is a mode of excitement more active than contact. The heart,
the intestines often inert when they are only touched by the scalpel,
contract powerfully when the point of it excites them. Cutting produces
a less sensible effect than tearing. Cut transversely, the fibres
oscillate and are agitated only by the sensible organic contractility,
whilst by the contractility of texture they experience an evident
retraction.

Chemical excitement is, in the greatest number of cases, the most
advantageous; but it is necessary here to distinguish that which
belongs to the horny hardening, from that which is the effect of
irritability brought into action. 1st. Plunge a frog without skin and
alive into a concentrated acid; instantly every thing is disorganized;
the reagent acts so strongly, that we can distinguish neither horny
hardening nor contractility. 2d. Weaken the acid a little and plunge
into it, the inferior extremities only of a frog; in an instant they
stiffen by the contraction of the extensors, which overcome the
flexors; for in this experiment, this is almost a constant phenomenon;
withdraw the animal; its thighs remain immoveable, life has been
extinguished in them; the contraction that has come on is a horny
hardening, and not a vital phenomenon. A dead frog plunged into the
same liquor experiences the same phenomenon. 3d. Weaken the acid still
more; the instant the animal is plunged into it its limbs contract; but
relaxation succeeds the contractions; these are alternate motions; it
is the irritability that begins to be put into action. Yet if the acid
is not very weak, some marks of the horny hardening still remain, and
the animal has a stiffness in the motions of the inferior extremities,
the evident result of the first degree of this horny hardening. 4th.
Finally, if the acid is very weak, it becomes a simple irritant which
puts in action the sensible organic contractility, without altering
the texture of the fibres; the animal after coming out of the fluid
preserves the same power of motion.

These experiments which it would be easy to multiply upon animals with
warm blood, but which I have never attempted upon them, evidently show
what belongs to the horny hardening, and what is the effect of vital
contraction. Yet there is not an exact limit between them, and there is
one degree of weakness of the acid in which these two causes of motions
are confounded.

There is a mode of excitement to which authors have not paid attention;
it may be called negative; it is that of which I spoke just now on the
subject of caloric, the privation of which is oftentimes a very active
stimulant. In the different experiments that I have had occasion to
make, this has frequently struck me. Apply a stimulant to a muscle, it
contracts; but at the end of some time the motion ceases, though the
contact continues; remove the stimulant, the motion frequently returns
in an instant. In general, nothing is more common in the heart, the
intestines, &c. than their contractions ceasing under the continued
action of a stimulant, and returning instantly upon its absence. I
confess that this phenomenon is not as invariable and constant as that
of the contraction produced by the application of the stimulus which
succeeds a state of non-excitement; but this happens very often. We
might say that the organic sensibility is in this case like the animal,
that every new state affects it, whether it be positive or negative.
The passage from non-excitement to excitement is more lively; but the
opposite passage is not less when it is sudden. Moreover this manner
of describing the sensible organic contractility in exercise, deserves
some further experiments.


_Of the Sensible Organic Contractility considered in relation to the
Organs._

The sensible organic contractility, considered in the organ in which it
has its seat, exhibits numerous varieties which are relative; 1st, to
the diversity of texture; 2d, to age; 3d, to sex; 4th, to temperament,
&c.


_First Variety. Diversity of the Muscular Texture._

The animal contractility is everywhere the same in the voluntary
muscles, because their organization is uniform. All things being equal
as to the number and length of the fibres, the phenomena of contraction
are exactly the same everywhere; here, on the contrary, the varieties
of texture inevitably produce varieties in the vital properties.

Each involuntary muscle is at first especially in relation with
the fluid which ordinarily acts as its stimulus. The blood alone
can regularly support the motions of the heart. Let this fluid be
altered in any manner, the contractions become irregular. All foreign
substances forced into the veins produce this phenomenon. The urine,
which supports with harmony the motions of the bladder, would disturb
those of the heart, if it circulated in its cavities. The blood,
more soft in appearance than the urine, can agitate convulsively the
bladder, if it happens to be in it. I took care with Desault of a
patient affected for a long time with retention of urine, and whom
he had cut for a very large stone. After the operation, the urine
remained stagnant in the bladder as long as it was alone, but when a
little blood entered this organ, it contracted involuntarily and the
bloody urine was evacuated. The excrements, which could continue for
a long time in the rectum without making it contract, would make the
stomach heave in an instant, &c. All these phenomena are to be referred
to varieties of sensibility of the mucous membranes, varieties which we
shall notice again. They prove evidently that each muscle has a degree
of organic contractility which is peculiar to it, and that this or that
fluid of the economy can exclusively, in a natural state, put it in
exercise in a regular manner.

Foreign fluids exhibit the same result; the emetic which makes
the stomach contract, is injected with impunity into the bladder;
purgatives do not produce vomiting, &c. This relation of foreign fluids
with the sensible organic contractility takes place, whether, as in
the preceding case, these fluids are applied to the mucous surfaces
corresponding to the muscles, or whether they come to the muscles by
the circulation, as the experiments have proved which were made in the
last age upon the introduction of medicinal substances into the veins;
experiments of which Haller has collected a great number of results.
We have seen in these experiments, the circulation present to all the
organs sometimes an emetic, and the stomach alone contracts; sometimes
a purgative, and the intestines only enter into action, &c. Taken
in by cutaneous absorption, medicinal substances occasion the same
phenomenon. Applied by friction, purgatives, emetics, &c. do not make
all the organic muscles contract, though the circulation presents them
to all, but only those with which their sensibility is in relation.

In the various affections of which they are the seat, we see the
organic muscles having each a peculiar mode of irritation answer to
each stimulus, and remaining deaf, if we may so say, to the voice of
the others.


_Second Variety. Age._

Age modifies wonderfully the sensible organic contractility. In
infancy it is very evident; the muscles answer with extreme ease to
the stimuli; the bladder retains the urine with difficulty; children
void it in sleep involuntarily; the heart contracts with a rapidity of
which the pulse is the measure; all the digestive phenomena are more
prompt; hence there is less interval between the returns of hunger. It
is a phenomenon analogous to that of the voluntary muscles, in which
the rapidity of the motions is found, in the first age, connected with
their small degree of force.

After infancy, the susceptibility of the muscles to answer to their
stimuli, is constantly diminishing; thus all the great phenomena of
organic life are continually becoming slower. The number of pulsations,
the duration of digestion, the longer continuance of the urine, &c. are
the thermometer of this slowness.

In old age the whole is weakened; the action of the organic muscles
gradually diminishes. Those of the bladder and rectum are the most
exposed to lose their contractile faculty; hence the retention of
urine, which is a frequent companion of old age; hence also the
accumulation of fecal matters above the anus, a disease almost as
common as the first at this age of life, though it has received less
attention from practitioners. Rich people and those accustomed to the
luxury of the table are especially subject to it. I have seen much of
it, as much even as of retention of urine, in the last year of the
practice of Desault. The intestines and the stomach languish more
slowly in their functions. It is the heart which resists the most;
it is the ultimum moriens, as it has been the first in exercise; the
duration of its pulsations measures exactly the duration of organic
life.


_Third Variety. Temperament._

Temperament modifies in a remarkable manner organic contractility. We
know that in some the pulsations are more frequent, the digestive and
urinary phenomena more rapid; that in others, every thing is marked by
more slowness in organic life; now these varieties have evidently their
primitive source in the varieties of the contractility of the heart,
the stomach, the intestines, &c. which have under this relation a great
influence in the difference of the temperaments. With respect to this
there are two essential observations to be made; 1st. The varieties
of force of the organic muscles do not always coincide with those of
the muscles of animal life. Thus we see an individual with feebly
developed exterior forms, with an evident weakness of the muscles of
the extremities, whilst the activity of digestion, of the urinary
evacuations, &c. announces the greatest energy in the sensible organic
contractility. I would remark with regard to this, that the heart is
more frequently in relation of force with the external muscles than the
stomach, the intestines and the bladder. A full pulse, well developed,
is usually found with an athletic constitution; whilst often this
constitution is united in the same subject to a feeble gastric system,
and especially the force of this gastric system is frequently connected
with external weakness. This fact, which the different temperaments
demonstrate to us in man, is evident in the series of animals. Those
who, like the carnivorous ones, have a very powerful animal muscular
system, have the parietes of the gastric cavities like membranes.
These parietes are strong in the herbivorous classes; they become very
conspicuous in the gallinaceous. In general, mastication over which the
animal contractility always presides, is in animals in an inverse ratio
of the force of trituration of the stomach, over which the sensible
organic contractility presides.

2d. The varieties of this property, relative to temperaments, exhibit
another phenomenon almost always foreign to the animal muscular
system. In fact in this the varieties are always general; we are
able by exercise to strengthen this or that muscular region; but the
differences of forces which are natural, always influence the whole
system. The arms and the legs, the thorax and the abdomen are uniformly
contractile in the different divisions of the muscles that belong
to them. On the contrary, it is rare to see this uniformity in the
involuntary muscles. One almost always predominates over the others;
sometimes it is the heart, sometimes the stomach and sometimes the
bladder. The gastric viscera even are frequently not all at the same
level as to force. The stomach is feeble when the intestines preserve
their ordinary action; and reciprocally the intestines too contractile
expel immediately fecal matters and thus produce a diarrhœa, though
the stomach may perform its functions well. This essential difference
in the two muscular systems arises from the circumstance that the
contractility of one depends upon a common centre, the brain; whilst
that of the other on the contrary has its principle insulated in each
organ in which it exists.


_Fourth Variety. Sex._

Women in general resemble children in the phenomena of sensible organic
contractility. The weakness of the motions coincides with their greater
rapidity in this sex, all whose internal muscles, like the external,
are more delicate and less strongly developed than in man. It might
be said that the contractile power of the womb has been formed at the
expense of the forces of all the other organs. In experiments, females
give results much less decided and always less durable than males. The
motions of the heart, the stomach, the intestines, &c. cease sooner;
these motions are less; it requires stronger stimuli to produce them,
&c.


_Fifth Variety. Season and Climate._

In winter and in cold climates, in which the cutaneous organ
contracted, and having as it were the horny hardness from the
impression of the surrounding air, has but a feeble action, all the
internal functions more active, require more energy in the forces that
preside over them; all the digestive, urinary and circulatory phenomena
are more evident. I do not know that there has yet been made any
comparative experiments upon irritability in the different seasons; but
I am persuaded that they would give different results.


_Sensible Organic Contractility considered in relation to the Action of
Stimuli upon the Organs._

We have just described separately the stimulant and the organ
stimulated; each being separate there is no effect upon the sensible
organic contractility; from their union alone results the exercise of
this property. What happens in this union? We know not. To wish to know
it, would be to wish to know how one body attracts another, how an acid
combines with an alkali, &c. In attraction, affinity and irritability,
we can only trace the phenomena to the action of bodies upon each
other. This action is the utmost limit of our researches.

But that which ought not to escape us here is, that in this last
property, the action is never immediate. There is always between
the stimulus and the organ something intermediate which receives
the irritation; this intermediate organ is a delicate membrane and
continuous with that of the arteries for the heart; it is a mucous
surface for the gastric viscera and the bladder. This intermediate
organ is more susceptible of receiving excitement than the muscle
itself. I have uniformly observed that by irritating the internal
surface of the heart, its contractions are greater, than by laying its
texture bare externally by removing its serous covering and afterwards
stimulating it. The same is true with regard to the organic muscles of
the abdomen.

Is there between the intermediate organ excited and the organ which
contracts, any nervous communications that transmit the impression?
I think not, the cellular texture is sufficient. In fact the serous
surfaces and the organic muscles have only this texture as a means
of union. The life of the first is in no way connected with that of
the others, since they often leave them as we shall see, and yet they
can transmit excitement to them. The pericardium and the peritoneum,
irritated in their portion corresponding with the organ that we wish
to move, produce a contraction in it. This fact is known to all those
who have made the least experiment; it is almost always in this way
that we stimulate the heart, the stomach, the intestines, the bladder,
&c. By carrying the stimulus over the serous surface but very lightly,
and so as not to communicate the motion to the fleshy fibres, we
obtain a result. Yet simple contact is not sufficient to transmit
the irritation; for example, by leaving the external layer of the
pericardium applied to the heart and afterwards irritating it, the
organ remains immoveable. If we separate the peritoneum from above the
bladder, so as to break all the cellular adhesions, and afterwards
reapply and stimulate it, the same immobility is observed.

When the intermediate organ that receives the excitement is diseased,
the contractility is uniformly altered. The same stimulus produces slow
or rapid contractions, according as the affection raises or diminishes
the sensibility of this intermediate organ. A slight inflammation of
the exterior of the bladder produces a kind of incontinence of urine;
that of the intestines occasions diarrhœa, &c. &c. On the contrary,
old catarrhs of the bladder, the affections in which weakness of the
mucous surface of this organ predominates, are the frequent causes of
retention.

I would observe that the existence of this intermediate organ is a
remarkable difference between the sensible organic contractility and
the insensible, for this organ does not exist in this last, in which
the same system receives the impression and reacts upon the body that
has produced it; for example, in the glandular, serous, cutaneous
systems, &c. the fluid which enters them for secretion or exhalation
produces in them the sensation, which is instantly followed by the
reaction. In the sensible contractility on the contrary, one system
feels and another is moved. This kind of mobility is less removed from
that of animal life, in which the organs of the senses and those of the
motion being wholly different, are very distant from each other.


_Sensible Organic Contractility considered in relation to its duration
after Death._

This duration is longer than that of the animal contractility. When the
spinal marrow is irritated, the external muscles remain immoveable,
whilst the internal ones are still in activity. There have been so many
examples related of this duration, Haller has multiplied experiments so
much upon this point, that there is no occasion for me to give proofs
here of a fact of which no one can any longer doubt. To this duration
are owing the evacuations of fecal matter and urine which often take
place an instant after death; the vomitings that are observed in some
subjects, if not in as evident a manner as during life, at least
sufficient to raise the aliments into the mouth of the dead body, which
is often completely filled with them, as I have frequently seen.

It is necessary, in relation to this duration, as in relation to that
of the animal contractility, to distinguish two species of death; 1st,
those that take place suddenly; 2d, those which are the consequence of
long disease.

In every sudden death, produced either by a violent lesion of the
brain, as in apoplexy, concussion, compression, effusion, &c. or by
an affection of the heart, as in syncope, a wound, or a ruptured
aneurism; or by a cessation of the action of the lungs, as in asphyxia
from deleterious gases, a vacuum, submersion, &c. the duration of
contractility is very evident; general death comes on first, then the
organs die partially; each vital force is afterwards successively
extinguished.

In every kind of death slowly produced, in all those especially which
are preceded by a disease of weakness, it is the partial death of
each organ that first takes place; each vital force is weakened and
extinguished, gradually, before the cessation of them as a whole, which
constitutes general death, comes on; when this death takes place, none
of the lives peculiar to each organ remains, whilst most of these lives
continue for a longer or shorter time after sudden death.

We cannot make these experiments upon dead bodies which we rarely have
in the hospitals till fifteen hours or more after death; but by killing
dogs by hunger, which, when long continued, becomes a real disease
that lasts in these animals eight, ten and even twelve days, I have
seen the contractility entirely extinguished at the moment of death.
Dogs have been often brought to me affected with different diseases,
especially three years since when there was a kind of epidemic among
these animals; now by opening them at the instant of death, by killing
them even some time before and thus producing a sudden death wholly
different from that which happens in the sound state in which all the
parts are uninjured in their functions and consequently in their vital
forces, I have always seen a constant absence of contractility, or at
least so greatly weakened that it appeared to be nothing.

Many physiologists have spoken of a general convulsion which comes
on in the organic muscles at the instant of death, of a rising of
the heart, the stomach, the intestines, &c. This excess of action is
sometimes real in sudden deaths, in those especially that we produce
for our experiments; it is very rare in deaths preceded by a long
disease in which the patient is extinguished, as it were, insensibly,
and passes gradually from life to death. It is a fault common to almost
all authors, to generalize too much the facts observed under certain
circumstances. Many false consequences are the results of it.


_Sympathies._

No organ receives more easily the influence of others, than the organic
muscles; all however are not equally susceptible of it. The heart
occupies the first rank in this respect; then comes the stomach, then
the intestines, and finally the bladder. It is in this order that we
shall now examine this influence.

It is a remarkable phenomenon, that every kind of affection in any
degree strong, arising in the economy, alters immediately the motions
of the heart. The least wound, oftentimes the slightest pain are
sufficient to produce derangements in it; now these derangements are
of two kinds; sometimes its action is arrested for a moment; hence
syncopes, a mode of derangement which happens especially in violent
and sudden pains. The vulgar expression which is employed in these
cases, viz. "my heart is failing," is perfectly true. Sometimes, and
this is the most common case, this action is accelerated; hence the
febrile motions so frequent in all the local affections, motions purely
sympathetic and which cease when the affection disappears. In many
local inflammations, the evil is too circumscribed to admit an obstacle
to the course of the blood, an obstacle, which according to Boerhaave,
forces the heart to redouble its action to surmount it; besides when
there is no swelling, but only pain in the part, and the febrile motion
comes on, it is there clearly a sympathetic phenomenon. The increase of
the action of the heart may depend no doubt upon a foreign substance,
which, mixed with the blood, alters and renders it more irritating;
it may be owing to an affection of the substance of the organ which
disposes it to be more irritable; but it is certainly very often
sympathetic, and depends upon that unknown relation which connects all
our organs, upon that consensus which links together all their actions,
and places them in reciprocal dependance.

I shall say as much of the stomach; though its sympathetic reaction may
not be altogether as frequent as that of the heart, yet it becomes very
evident under many circumstances. Most local affections, especially
inflammations are accompanied with sympathetic vomitings. Various
fevers have in their commencement similar vomitings. It is in the
hospitals especially that we frequently observe these phenomena. Many
physicians have not considered these vomitings as merely sympathetic,
but as the index of a bilious affection, founded on this, that bile
is then almost always thrown up. But in all the animals that I have
opened, I have almost always seen the stomach when empty containing a
certain quantity of this fluid which had flowed back from the duodenum;
other authors have also made similar observations; so that it appears
that in the state of vacuity, the existence of bile in the stomach
is a natural phenomenon. Hence it is not astonishing, that in the
commencement of diseases, and even in their course, the stomach being
sympathetically excited and thus becoming the seat of vomiting, more or
less of this fluid should be thrown up. It would be brought up even in
health if vomiting is then excited by an emetic; this is what sometimes
happens in the morning when the stomach is empty, if any cause foreign
to an affection of the liver, as the sight of a disgusting object,
produces vomiting; the bile then comes out like every thing else that
is contained in the stomach. I do not say that oftentimes the liver
being sympathetically excited in the commencement of diseases, does
not furnish more bile, that this superabundant bile flowing into the
stomach, does not make this viscus contract; but certainly this is
not most commonly the case; we vomit bile as we discharge it by the
anus, because it is found in the stomach and intestines, and not
because it is superabundant. If vomiting was a natural function, the
bilious evacuations in this way would be as natural as the greenish
tinge of the excrements, which is always found in a state of health.
We see then, from this, that the bilious vomitings are, in many cases,
purely accessory, and that the essential phenomenon is the sympathetic
contraction of the stomach.

In the case of which I have just spoken there is no gastric difficulty;
the sympathetic alteration of the stomach only extends to the fleshy
fibres. But most frequently this gastric difficulty appears at the
beginning of diseases in which there is local affection; sand-like
substances are vomited up; it is because then the organ essentially
affected, the lungs for example, if it is in a peripneumony, has acted
sympathetically not only on the fleshy fibres, but also upon the mucous
membrane. This excited increases its secretion; hence these sand-like
substances, which are nothing but the mucous juices mixed with the
gastric fluid and with the bile; now the presence of these substances
is often sufficient to make the stomach contract, and produce vomiting
which expels them.

From this it is evident that there can be sympathetic vomitings without
gastric difficulty, and sympathetic gastric difficulty with a vomiting
immediately produced. In the first case the fleshy fibres feel the
sympathetic influence of the affected organ; in the second it is the
mucous membrane. But how, when the lungs, the pleura, the skin,
&c. being affected, does the stomach come into action? I have said
that the word sympathy was only a veil for our ignorance in respect
to the relations of the organs to each other. Vomitings produced by
erysipelas, phlegmon, pleurisy, peripneumony, &c. are then most often
an effect exactly analogous to the increase of the action of the heart,
which produces fever. They resemble the cerebral derangement from
which arises delirium, a derangement which is much more rare, &c. All
these phenomena indicate that the other organs feel by reaction the
state of that which is affected, &c. Physicians who have not viewed
all these phenomena in a great and general manner, have confined their
treatment to too narrow bounds. Much attention was formerly paid to the
sympathetic derangement of the heart, and bleeding was much practised
in the beginning of diseases; for some years past much regard has been
had to the sympathetic derangement of the stomach, and emetics are
frequently given; perhaps before long, more attention will be given to
the weights of the head, pains in that part, watchfulness, drowsiness,
&c. which are very common sympathetic symptoms, and the treatment will
be directed to the brain. In these varieties judicious physicians
will regard all these phenomena in a general manner; they will see in
all a proof of that general agreement which disposes together all the
functions, which connects all and thus connects their derangements;
they will see each organ rise up, as it were against the evil which
is introduced into the economy, and each react in its own way; they
will see these reactions producing effects wholly different, according
to the organ reacting, fever arising from the reaction of the heart,
delirium, drowsiness, watchfulness, convulsions, &c. from that of
the brain, vomiting from that of the stomach, diarrhœa from that of
the intestines, gastric and intestinal derangements, foulness of the
tongue from those of the mucous membranes, overflowings of bile from
that of the liver, &c. Thus in a machine in which the whole is united
and connected together, if one part is deranged all the others are so
also. We should laugh at the mechanist who attempted to mend but one
of these pieces, and neglected to repair the local derangement from
which all those arose which the machine exhibits. Let us not laugh at
the physician who attacks only a single symptom, without combating
the disease, of which he oftentimes knows not the principle, though
he knows that this principle exists; but let us laugh at him, if he
attaches to his treatment an importance which is nothing compared with
that of the disease.

The intestines next to the stomach are the most often sympathetically
affected in diseases. The bladder is the organic muscle that is the
last to feel the influences that go from the diseased organ; this
sometimes however happens. In fevers, we know that retentions of
urine from sympathetic and temporary paralysis, are not very rare;
incontinence of urine is less often seen.


_Character of the Vital Properties._

We see from what has been said, that the vital properties are very
active in the organic muscles, especially as it respects contractility.
These muscles are really during life, in constant action: they receive
with great ease the influence of other organs. Their vital properties
are altered with the greatest promptness, especially that which I have
just pointed out; for the insensible contractility is rarely altered in
them, because it does not perform an essential part. Observe in fact
that the morbid derangements of an organ affect always the predominant
vital force of that organ. Animal contractility is frequently
altered in the preceding system; in this it is the sensible organic
contractility. On the contrary, the insensible being very small,
the phenomena over which it presides remain always nearly the same;
nutrition is always uniform; lesions of the muscular texture are rare;
when they take place, it is rather by communication, as in cancers of
the stomach, in which the disease begins upon the mucous surface, and
in which the fleshy fibres are only consequently affected. The heart
and the womb are the muscles that are the most subject to these morbid
alterations; yet in the first they belong oftener to the internal
membrane than to the fleshy fibres themselves. On the contrary in the
systems in which the sensible organic contractility is incessantly in
action, as in the cutaneous, the serous, &c. in which it presides over
nutrition and exhalation; in the glandular, the mucous, &c. in which
it produces secretion and nutrition, it is this which is especially
altered. From these derangements arise alterations of texture, organic
diseases properly called, which are as common in these systems, as they
are rare in those in which the insensible contractility, is so very
obscure, as to be only at the degree necessary for nutrition.

It is to this that must be referred the infrequency of acute
inflammations of this system. As this affection is frequent in the
cutaneous, the serous, the mucous systems, &c. so this system, whose
functions require but little insensible organic contractility, presents
it rarely. Those who open many dead bodies know, that the texture of
the heart is hardly ever found inflamed. Nothing is more common than
phlegmasia of the external or serous membrane, and of the internal
or mucous membrane of the stomach, the intestines, &c.; but nothing
is more obscure and less frequently seen than that of their fleshy
tunic. In rheumatism, there is sometimes when the pains cease around
the joints, violent cholics, spasmodic vomitings even, indices perhaps
of an acute affection of the fibres of the stomach or intestines; but
we never find marks of these affections; we do not see the muscular
texture exhibiting the bright red of the inflamed mucous, cutaneous
and serous organs; or at least I have never observed it.

Physicians have not paid sufficient attention to the difference of
inflammations according to the difference of systems; but especially
they have not sufficiently observed that this difference accords
perfectly with that of the insensible organic contractility; that
where this vital force is most characterized, inflammations have the
greatest tendency to take place, because it is this which presides
over their formation; because these affections suppose its increase;
as convulsions suppose the increase of animal contractility, as
vomitings, accelerated pulsations of the heart, suppose that of organic
contractility, &c. I cannot repeat it too much, that the most frequent
diseases in each system, put always in action, raise or diminish the
predominant vital force in that system. It is a new pathological view,
that may be fruitful in results.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

PHENOMENA OF THE ACTION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

These phenomena are, as in the preceding system, relative to the state
of contraction or to that of relaxation.


I. _Force of the Contractions._

It is never capable of being raised to the point which the force of
the muscles of animal life sometimes attains. Between the strongest
and the weakest pulse, between the feeble jet which precedes some
retentions of urine, and the jet of the most vigorous man, there is
much less difference than between the langour of the voluntary muscles
of some women and the power of those of a maniac, or a man in anger.
The heart and the deltoid muscle are nearly equal in respect to their
fleshy mass; now what would become of the circulation, if the first
sometimes sent the blood with the force which the second uses to raise
the superior extremity? A fit of anger, mania, &c. is sufficient to
produce aneurisms. On the other hand the organic muscles are not
affected with those prostrations of forces so common in the others;
paralysis is foreign to them, because they are not within the cerebral
influence. There is something which answers to convulsions; it is the
irregular agitations which produce so many varieties in the pulse
of acute fevers, agitations which must be distinguished from those
produced by an organic defect of the heart; but these agitations are
wholly different from spasms of the voluntary muscles; there is even no
analogy.

There is not in the force of the contraction of the muscles of which
we are treating, the waste which is so remarkable in that of the other
muscles; the effort is nearly proportionable to the acting cause, and
the distinction of this force into absolute and effective, cannot be
applied here; only there is required more or less contractile energy,
according as the body to be expelled from a hollow muscle, is solid or
fluid. Hence why the great intestines are provided with longitudinal
fibres more characterized than those of the small intestines; why the
rectum especially, in which the excrements have their greatest degree
of solidity, exhibits these fibres in a more evident manner than the
colon or the cæcum, though under a different form; why in diarrhœas the
weakest contraction is sufficient to evacuate the intestines, whilst
the sensible organic contractility of the rectum being insufficient to
void very solid excrements, it is necessary that the abdominal muscle
should aid the expulsion; why when a hard body is introduced into the
stomach, and the gastric juices do not soften it, it remains there a
long time before being expelled, and produces an inconvenient weight,
&c. &c. We know with what rapidity the passage of liquids takes place
from the stomach to the intestines, and how long on the contrary solid
aliments remain in the first.

The force of the organic muscles is incomparably greater in the
phenomena of life than in our experiments. Once laid bare, the heart
communicates only feeble motions, and most often irregular ones. There
is no proportion between the force necessary to produce the jet,
sometimes from seven to eight feet, which the blood exhibits coming
from the open carotid of a dog, and the force of the contractions which
the strongest stimuli produce when applied to the heart extracted from
the body. Nothing equals in our experiments the force of contraction
necessary for vomiting, &c. &c.

Numerous calculations have been made upon the force of contraction,
in the organic muscles as in the preceding, and there has been the
same variety of results. Can we in fact calculate the degrees of a
phenomenon which a thousand causes make vary every instant, not only in
different individuals, but even in the same, which sleep, digestion,
exercise, rest, tranquillity of mind, violence of the passions, day,
night, every thing in a word, incessantly modifies? I do not know that
we digest twice in exactly the same period, if the urine twice remains
the same length of time in the bladder before being discharged, if its
jet is twice exactly equal, &c.

The force of the organic muscles often remains in its ordinary degree,
or is even increased; whilst a general weakness possesses the others.
The force of the pulse, vomiting, diarrhœa, &c. coinciding with a
general prostration of the muscles of animal life, are not rare
phenomena in diseases.


II. _Quickness of the Contractions._

It varies singularly; very rapid in experiments, when death is recent
and the stimuli are very strong, the contractions are in general slower
in the natural state; we might say that it is in the inverse ratio of
the force; often at the instant we open the pericardium, the heart
moves with a rapidity which the eye can hardly follow, especially if we
inject an irritating fluid into this serous sac, a little before laying
the organ bare. The contractions increase much in quickness in certain
diseases; those of the heart, for example, then acquire in the adult
a rapidity often much greater than they have in the first age; this
rapidity is also in this case entirely distinct from the force of its
contractions; it is rare even that these two things are found united at
the highest point. In general when the force of the heart is increased,
there is a little more quickness; but there is very often a diminution
of force with an increase of quickness, or the force remains the same,
the quickness being much increased.

We have seen that the voluntary muscles have in general a degree of
quickness beyond which they cannot go, and that this quickness belongs
to the original constitution. Is not the same phenomenon observed
here? Often in two fevers whose symptoms are the same, whose degree of
intensity seems to be exactly uniform, the pulse is infinitely more
frequent in one individual than in the other. This does not always
denote a difference in the disease, but in the primitive constitution,
an aptitude of one of the two hearts to contract much quicker under the
same stimulant. Who does not know that in experiments, the contractile
rapidity is infinitely variable under the influence of the same causes?

Each organic muscle has its degree of quickness; the heart, the
stomach, the intestines, the bladder, &c. differ remarkably in this
respect.


III. _Duration of the Contractions._

The heart never remains in permanent contraction, as often happens in
the voluntary muscles. Though hunger seems to prove the contrary in the
stomach and the intestines, yet this phenomenon is not contradictory;
in fact, the permanent contraction of the empty gastric viscera is
the result of the contractility of texture. Whenever the sensible
organic contractility is in action, there is alternate contraction and
dilatation; this alternation even characterizes essentially this last
property, and distinguishes it from the animal contractility and from
that of texture, in which the state of contraction is often permanent.


IV. _State of the Muscle in Contraction._

All the phenomena described for the voluntary muscles, are almost
applicable to these, such as the hardening, increase in thickness,
diminution in length, expression of the blood, &c. &c. But there
are some differences between the heart and the gastric muscles, in
respect to the mode of contraction. In fact we see very sensibly in
the first, 1st, contractions of the whole analogous to those of the
voluntary muscles, contractions which take place in the state of
health, which produce the projection of the blood, and which are easily
made in experiments when the animals are still living; 2d, numerous
oscillations which seize upon the fibres, which agitate the whole of
them without producing any sensible effect, without contracting the
cavity, without projecting the blood for example. These oscillations
are observed at the instant of death, when the heart is ceasing to
be contractile; we may then irritate it in vain, there are no more
contractions of it as a whole; though there is a general and very
evident vibration of its fibres, yet its cavity is not contracted; the
blood stagnates in it. The heart perfectly resembles under this double
relation the voluntary muscles; it is agitated as we see these muscles
in the shuddering, that is called horripilatio, as we see it also in
certain sub-cutaneous muscles in some individuals. I have already, for
example, seen many persons affected with an habitual trembling of a
portion of the solæus, a trembling very evident to the eye through the
skin, and which had nothing in common with the contraction necessary to
the extension of the foot.

The involuntary muscles of the abdomen never exhibit this double mode
of contraction. Instead of the quick and sudden motions of the whole
of the muscle, we see but a slow contraction in it, often but slightly
apparent; it is a kind of creeping; there is not even to speak properly
a contraction of the whole, like that of the heart in which all the
fibres of an auricle or ventricle are moved at the same time; here each
fleshy surface appears to act successively. Placed at the origin of
the great vessels, the bladder and the stomach would be incapable of
communicating to the blood those motions by jerks, which the jet of an
artery exhibits at each contraction. On the other hand, at the instant
the motion ends in the stomach, the intestines and the bladder, we
never see in them those oscillations, those vibrations which are almost
constant in the heart and the voluntary muscles, and which we can even
create in them at will.


V. _Motions imparted by the Organic Muscles._

There are hardly ever simple motions in these muscles; the different
interlacing of their fleshy surface allows them to act almost always in
three or four different directions upon the substances they contain.
We can say nothing general upon those motions which compose the
diastole of the heart, the peristaltic motion of the alimentary canal,
the contraction of the bladder, &c. Each muscle has its mechanism
which belongs to the physiological history of the function to which it
contributes.


VI. _Phenomena of the Relaxation of the Organic Muscles._

In the relaxation of the organic muscles, phenomena in general take
place that are opposite to the preceding. It is then useless to
enumerate them; but there is a question here that should be examined,
that of knowing the nature of that state which succeeds contraction and
alternates with it.

In the muscles of animal life, when the contraction ceases, the muscle
does not in general go back itself to the state it was in antecedent
to the contraction, but it is drawn back to it by its antagonist; for
example, when the biceps is contracted to bend the fore-arm and its
contraction ceases, it becomes passive; the triceps putting itself
then in motion, extends it and draws it back to its natural position,
by acting at first on the bones which communicate the motion to this
muscle. Each muscular power of animal life finds then in that which
is opposed to it a cause of return to the state it had left in order
to contract. It is not so in organic life; its muscles, which are all
hollow, have no antagonists. We have considered as such to a certain
extent, the substances contained in the hollow muscles, substances
which oppose the effect of contraction; but incapable most commonly
of reacting after having been compressed, on account of their want of
elasticity, these substances cannot perform the same offices as real
antagonists.

Most physiologists have admitted as a cause of dilatation, the entrance
of new substances, which replace, in the muscular cavities, those
expelled by contraction; thus the entrance of new blood into the
heart, aliments into the different portions of the alimentary canal,
has been considered as proper to dilate these organs; so that according
to this opinion the muscles would be purely passive when they enlarged.
But the following considerations, many of which some authors, Grimaud
in particular, have already stated, do not permit us to consider in
this way the dilatation of the organic muscles, that of the heart in
particular.

1st. When we lay bare a hollow muscle, the heart, the stomach, or the
intestines, and empty it entirely of the substances that it contains,
it contracts and dilates alternately as when it is full, if we apply an
external stimulant to it. 2d. If we empty by punctures all the great
vessels which go to the heart, or come from it, so as to evacuate it
entirely, its alternate dilatations and contractions continue for some
time. 3d. In order to judge comparatively of the degree of force of the
contraction and the dilatation, we can extract two hearts nearly equal
in size from two living animals; place immediately the fingers of one
hand into the auricles or the ventricles of the first, and grasp with
the other hand the exterior of the second; you will feel that one makes
as great an effort in dilating as the other does in contracting. This
fact already observed by Pechlin, is so much the more remarkable, as
the effort of dilatation is often greater than that of contraction. I
have even observed, in repeating this experiment, that whatever effort
we make with the hand, we cannot prevent the organ from dilating.
4th. The alternate extension and contraction, from which arises the
vermicular motion of the intestines, is seen during hunger when we open
the abdomen of an animal. 5th. The hardness of the organic muscular
texture is as evident during dilatation as during vacuity. 6th. I
have many times observed that at the instant in which I irritated the
heart with the point of a scalpel, that a dilatation was the first
consequence of it, and that contraction was only consequent to it.
It happens in general more often that contraction begins the motions
in our experiments; but certainly, the muscle being at rest, it is
frequently a dilatation that first manifests itself.

It appears then very probable that the dilatation of the organic
muscles is a phenomenon as vital as their contraction; that these two
states are united in a necessary manner; that both of them compose
muscular motion, of which contraction is but one part. Who knows even
if each may not be disturbed separately, if to a regular contraction
may not succeed an irregular dilatation and vice versa? Who knows
if certain alterations in the pulse do not belong to injuries of
dilatation and others to those of contraction? I am far from being
certain; for in medicine we must rest our belief on certainty and not
on presumption; but we can make this point an object of research.

It appears that sometimes the voluntary muscles are also the seat of
a true active dilatation. 1st. A muscle, laid bare and extracted from
the body, contracts and afterwards dilates, without being drawn to this
state of dilatation by any cause. 2d. In an amputation, we often see
in the stump the end of the divided fibres alternately lengthen and
contract; a double motion both of which appears to be equally vital.
3d. In many kinds of convulsions in which the extremities stiffen, in
those, for example, which accompany most hysterical fits, it appears
that there is a very evident active dilatation; by placing in fact
the hand upon the muscles which should then be relaxed, from the
disposition of the parts, we perceive a hardness as great as in feeling
of the contracted muscles.

There are many researches to be made upon this mode of dilatation of
our parts, a mode which undoubtedly is not exclusively confined to
the muscular system, but which appears to belong also to the iris, to
the spongy texture of the corpora cavernosa, to the nipples, &c. All
these organs move by dilating very evidently; contraction succeeds in
them expansion, as in the common muscles relaxation does contraction.
Expansion is the principal phenomenon. Perhaps also, as some modern
authors have thought, the sudden swellings of the cellular texture,
which accompany contusions, bruises, &c. are the result of this mode of
motion.


ARTICLE FIFTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

The organic muscular system is wholly the reverse of the preceding,
as it respects development. This is but slightly characterized in the
early ages, whereas the growth of the other is precocious. Let us
follow it in all the ages.


I. _State of the Organic Muscular System in the Fœtus._

In the first days after conception, the heart is formed; it is the
first point of motion, a punctum saliens, as it has been called. The
researches of different authors, of Haller in particular, have rendered
clear the successive progress of its increase in the early periods.
Rather late in their formation, the muscles of the interior of the
abdomen are yet developed before those that form the parietes of this
cavity. It is the size of the intestines, the stomach, the bladder, &c.
almost as much as that of the liver, which gives to the cavity in which
these viscera are found, the remarkable capacity that it then exhibits.

Nearly uniform at this age, as it respects the proportion of their
size, all the organic muscles are not as much so in regard to that of
their texture. The heart is evidently firmer and more dense than all
the others; its texture is very distinct. The fibres of the stomach,
intestines and bladder are soft and loose and resemble exactly those of
the muscles of animal life; but little blood goes to them in proportion
to what they are afterwards to receive. The fibres of the heart, on
the contrary, dense and compact, have a power of action in proportion
to what they are afterwards to have. Their redness is as distinct; as
much blood penetrates and consequently nourishes them. This redness of
the heart, analogous in the adult to that of the voluntary muscles,
forms at this period a contrast with the remarkable paleness of these
muscles. Besides it has, as in all the other parts where it exists, a
deep tinge, owing to the kind of blood that produces it.

We easily see the reason of the quantity of blood that penetrates the
heart, as this organ then very active in its motions, has need of much
force, whilst the others, almost immoveable, require but little.

Yet the sensible organic contractility of the heart in the fœtus and
in the first age has been exaggerated, undoubtedly on account of the
extreme rapidity that the circulation then exhibits. This rapidity
depends as much on the activity of the tonic forces of the general
capillary system, as on that of the heart; for the blood, when it has
arrived in the capillary system, is wholly beyond the influence of
the heart, as we have seen; the stay that it makes there is wholly
dependant upon the forces of the system itself; now these forces, at
that time very active, accelerate the course of the blood, and send
it into the venous system, from which it goes to the heart. If the
excitability of this were double and even treble, and the blood entered
it but slowly, it would be unable to support a rapid and at the same
time continuous pulse. Haller was drawn to this opinion by believing
that the heart was the only agent of impulse of the blood circulating
even in the small vessels. Besides, there is no doubt that the sensible
organic contractility of the heart is less easily put into action by
experiments in the fœtus, and that it is also much less durable. Then
the strongest stimuli have less effect upon it an instant after death,
than those of less power exhibit upon the heart of an animal that has
been born. I have many times established this fact upon fœtuses of
guinea-pigs. Compared with that of the voluntary muscles, the mobility
of the heart is undoubtedly remarkable in the fœtus; but compared to
what it will be after birth, it is but slight.

It is precisely the same with the contractility of the stomach, the
bladder and the intestines; most commonly we can produce no motion in
these muscles by stimuli. Mr. Léveillé has already made these important
observations; he has also remarked that the urine remained in the
bladder, and the meconium in the great intestines, without producing a
contraction sufficient to expel them. I do not think however that there
could be during life a complete immobility of the gastric viscera,
and for this reason; most commonly the meconium is only met with in
the great intestines; it must have been formed in them then, if there
was complete immobility of the gastric muscles; now it is much more
probable that it is the residuum of the bile, of all the mucous juices,
&c.; that consequently it has been pushed successively by a slow action
from the superior part towards the inferior of the alimentary canal.

The softness of the organic muscles renders their extensibility of
texture very great at this period. I would observe however that the
hearts of dead fœtuses do not exhibit those numberless varieties of
size which those of adults do in the right side, according to the
different kinds of death.


II. _State of the Organic Muscular System during Growth._

The first days of existence are marked by an internal motion as quick
in manifesting itself as the external of which we have spoken. The
sucking of the milk, the evacuation of the urine and meconium, &c.
are indices of this general internal motion, of this agitation almost
sudden of all the involuntary muscles.

It is not the brain which, entering into action at birth, produces the
contraction of these muscles, since as we have said they are not under
its government; it appears to depend, 1st, on the sympathetic influence
exerted upon their system, by the cutaneous organ, which is irritated
by the new medium; 2d, on the excitement made upon the beginning of
all the mucous surfaces, and upon the whole of that of the lungs, an
excitement which afterwards reacts upon these muscles; 3d, on that
produced by fluids introduced into the stomach; 4th, on the sudden
entrance of the red blood into all these muscles, till then penetrated
like the others with black; this cause is essential; irritability
appears to be in part dependant on it, or at least to borrow from it a
remarkable increase of force; 5th, the excretion of the meconium and
the urine is also powerfully assisted by the abdominal muscles, which
then enter into activity with the whole system to which they belong.

The general internal motion which takes place in the first moments of
existence, and which is produced by the suddenly increased activity
of the involuntary muscles, has an important use with respect to the
mucous surfaces, which it relieves of the fluids that load them,
and whose presence becomes painful. Where the mucous surfaces have
not around them fleshy layers of the involuntary muscles, as in the
bronchia, the nasal fossæ, &c. the muscles of animal life more or less
distant, perform this function, as for example, the diaphragm and the
intercostals, free the bronchial surface by coughing, and the pituitary
by sneezing.

As we recede from the period of birth, the organic muscles grow in
general much less in proportion than the others; it is this that
gradually re-establishes the equilibrium between the two systems. I
would remark however, as it respects the predominance of the first,
that it is much less conspicuous in the fœtus than that of the nervous
system. The brain, for example, is in proportion much larger than the
heart.

It is probable that the muscles of which we are treating, exhibit, at
this period, the same varieties of composition as the others, that
gelatine especially predominates in them, that they have less fibrin,
&c. This last substance perhaps exists, in the early periods, more
abundantly in the heart than in the other muscles of this class.

We have observed two very distinct periods in the growth of the
other muscles; one is finished when they have acquired their length;
the other, when their thickness is complete. The first has not, in
the organic system, a term as distinct; when the stature no longer
increases, the gastric and urinary organs, and the heart still lengthen
and grow.

We have considered growth in too general a manner. Each system has
a different term in this great phenomenon. The osseous and muscular
systems of animal life, and those which depend on them, as the fibrous,
the cartilaginous, &c. have especially an influence upon the general
stature of the body; it is these which produce this or that height; but
this height has no influence upon the length of the intestines, or the
capacity of the stomach, the heart, the bladder, &c. The glandular,
serous, mucous systems, &c. are equally independent of stature; thus
in these numerous varieties, it has much more influence upon the
extremities, than upon the abdomen, the thorax, &c. A great height
indicates the predominance of the apparatus of locomotion, but not of
those of digestion, respiration, &c. The termination of the growth in
height, which we consider in a general manner for the whole body, is
only the termination of the growth of the muscles, the bones and their
dependancies, and not of that of the internal viscera, which still
lengthen and become thicker. It is easy to be convinced of this, by
comparing the organic muscles of a young man of eighteen years, with
those of a man of thirty or forty.

The organic muscles do not appear to be subject to those irregularities
of growth which the other muscles and the bones frequently exhibit.
We know that the stature often remains stationary for many years,
and that suddenly it acquires very great dimensions in a very short
time; this phenomenon is remarkable especially after long diseases.
Now notwithstanding these inequalities, the heart and all the other
analogous muscles grow in an uniform manner; the regularity of the
internal functions to which these muscles especially contribute, could
not adapt itself to those aberrations which would be unable to disturb
the functions of the locomotive organs. Besides, if they took place,
the circulation, digestion, excretion of urine, &c. would exhibit
corresponding aberrations; now this is never observed. The heart and
the gastric muscles, &c. always grow in an infant whose stature remains
stationary; they do not grow suddenly in one who grows at once; hence
why the thorax and the abdomen become large in the first case, and
remain contracted in the second in proportion to the extremities.

Besides these two systems are never in precise relation of nutrition
and power. I have already observed that very large organic muscles
often exist with very small voluntary ones, and vice versa.

Let us consider neither the growth nor nutrition in an uniform manner;
each system is developed and increases in its own way; all are never
found at the same periods of this function. Why? because nutrition,
like all the other acts over which life presides, is essentially
dependant on the vital forces, and these forces vary in each system.

The growth of the involuntary muscular system is not uniform in all the
organs which compose it. Each increases more or less, or is differently
developed; one often predominates over the others in an evident manner;
a bladder with strong, fleshy fibres, with columns as they are called,
is often found in a subject with a debilitated stomach, with small
intestines, &c.; reciprocally, the stomach, the heart, &c. have often
an insulated predominance.


III. _State of the Organic Muscular System after Growth._

It is from the twenty-fourth to the twenty-sixth year, that the organic
muscles are completely developed. Then the thorax and the abdomen which
contain them have their greatest capacity. These muscles are then as
they are to remain through life; they have a density much greater
than in youth; their power is increased and their colour is deeper.
In general this is subject in the heart to frequent varieties, which
coincide very nearly with the varieties of the preceding system. Acute
and chronic diseases have nearly the same influence upon it. It is
equally the index of the sanguineous, lymphatic temperaments, &c. by
the different tinge it assumes. The colour of the gastric, intestinal
and vesical fibres varies less; their whiteness, more uniform, is
rarely influenced by diseases.

We cannot increase, by constant exercise, the nutrition of the organic
muscles. Aliments taken beyond measure, making the stomach frequently
contract, weaken it instead of developing its fibres more, as happens
from constant exercise given to a superior or inferior extremity. The
bladder incessantly in action in some cases of incontinence, is thus
gradually weakened and loses its energy. We might say that these two
systems were in this respect in an inverse order.

It appears that the nutrition of the organic muscles, like that of
the others, is subject to frequent variations; that at some periods
they are more developed and less so at others. Diseases have a great
influence upon this phenomenon, which proves, like the softening of the
bones and their return to the natural state, the constant composition
and decomposition of which these organs are the seat. We find in the
dissecting rooms many differences in different subjects, as it respects
the colour, density and cohesion of the muscles. Now what many exhibit
then at once, the same individual often experiences successively; the
same man no doubt has, according to the different influences to which
he is exposed, his heart red, dense, large and well nourished at one
period of life, and feeble, pale and small at another; for the internal
organs experience the same alterations as the exterior. Now we know
that the external appearance often changes during life.


IV. _State of the Organic Muscular System in Old Age._

As we advance in age, the muscular system of which we are treating
becomes weak like all the others; yet its action is more durable;
it survives, if we may so say, that of the other. When the old
man, almost immoveable, crawls about but slowly and with pain, his
pulse, digestion, &c. have vigour still. This difference of the two
systems is so much the more remarkable, as the time of activity of
the second is almost by half less than that of the first; sleep cuts
off in fact almost half of the duration of the voluntary motions,
whilst it leaves the involuntary wholly untouched. This phenomenon of
the organic muscles as it were surviving the voluntary in the last
periods of life, is derived on a great scale from the same principle
from which arises on a small one the lassitude which follows the
contraction in an insulated motion. A less durable motion is necessary
to fatigue the voluntary muscles, than to fatigue the involuntary; the
stomach empty remains for a long time contracted upon itself without
producing any painful sensation, whilst if we hold a body strongly
grasped between our fingers for a quarter of an hour, all the flexors
are soon painfully affected. After a convulsion of half an hour, in
which all the locomotive muscles have been stiff, the whole body is
broken, as it is called; it cannot admit of any motion; whilst after
a paroxysm of fever of six or eight hours in which the pulse has been
violently agitated, the heart often preserves the natural type of its
contractions; it requires repeated paroxysms to weaken it. All these
phenomena of the two muscular systems evidently prove that that of
animal life is fatigued much the soonest; it is this which occasions
its intermission. Is it then astonishing that, although less often in
exercise than the other, it exhausts sooner the quantum of force nature
has given to it? is it astonishing that the other survives the longest?
Life is a great exercise which gradually wears up the organs in motion,
and which requires their rest; this rest is death; now each moveable
organ arrives at it sooner or later, according to the different degree
of the forces which it has to expend, and according to its greater or
less disposition to be wearied by this great exercise.

Yet the organic muscles are gradually weakened. The pulse becomes
slower, digestion is longer in old age; the bladder and rectum first
cease to act; then the intestines remain inactive; the stomach and
especially the heart die the last.

A long time before death, the muscular cohesion is weakened in this
system as in the preceding; the fleshy texture becomes flaccid; the
parietes of the heart support themselves in youth; they flatten in
old age. The gastric system of a young animal suddenly killed during
hunger is firm, dense and contracted upon itself; in an old one, under
the same circumstance, it is but little contracted; the stomach and
intestines remain much more dilated; they are loose and soft; it is
the same phenomenon as in the preceding muscles, which vacillate under
the skin, from want of cohesion. The bladder remains constantly large,
though empty.




MUCOUS SYSTEM.


This system, the name of which I borrow from the fluid that constantly
lubricates it, and which is furnished by small glands inherent in its
structure, appears everywhere in a membranous form; that of fasciculi
is wholly foreign to it. In speaking of the mucous organs we shall
designate them almost always under the name of membranes. Their study
is a new object of research. Pinel has been among the first, who has
perceived the necessity of considering them in a general manner as
it respects diseases. I believe that I am the first who has regarded
them generally in an anatomical and physiological view. Few systems
deserve more attention; upon it take place all the great phenomena of
digestion, respiration, secretion, excretion, &c.; it is the seat of
many diseases. It should alone, in a nosography in which diseases are
distributed by systems, occupy a place equal to that of many.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE DIVISIONS AND FORMS OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.

The mucous membranes occupy the interior of the cavities which
communicate with the skin by the different openings this covering
has on the surface of the body. Their number at first view is very
considerable; for the organs in which they are reflected are very
numerous. The mouth, the stomach, the intestines, the œsophagus, the
bladder, the urethra, the womb, the ureters, all the excretories, &c.
&c. derive from these membranes a part of their structure. Yet if
we consider that wherever they are continuous, wherever we see them
originate, by extending from each other, as they originated in the
first instance from the skin, we shall perceive that this number must
be wonderfully limited. In fact by thus describing them, not separately
in each part, but at the same time in all those upon which they are
continued, we see that they are reduced to two general surfaces,
of which all the others are portions, and which, on account of the
different parts to which they are distributed, can be called, the one
gastro-pulmonary, the other genito-urinary. The first is found in the
head, the neck and the abdomen. This last cavity and more especially
the pelvis, contain the second.

There is also a small insulated mucous surface; it is that which enters
by the openings of the nipples and lines the lactiferous tubes. But it
is so small that it deserves but little attention; besides, what will
be said of the two others will be equally applicable to it. It is then
useless to examine it in a general manner.


I. _Of the two General Mucous Membranes, the Gastro-Pulmonary and the
Genito-Urinary._

The gastro-pulmonary surface penetrates into the interior by the mouth,
the nose and the anterior face of the eye. 1st. It lines the first and
second of these cavities, extends from the first to the excretory ducts
of the parotid and sub-maxillary glands, from the other into all the
sinuses, forms the conjunctiva, dips down into the puncta lachrymalia,
the nasal duct, the sac of the same name, and is continued into the
nose; 2d, it descends into the pharynx, furnishes an elongation to
the Eustachian tube, then penetrates the internal ear and lines it, as
we shall see; 3d, it dips down into the trachea and is spread upon all
the air-tubes; 4th, it penetrates into the œsophagus and the stomach;
5th, it extends to the duodenum where it furnishes two elongations,
one destined to the ductus choledochus, to the numerous branches of
the hepatic and cystic ducts and the gall-bladder, the other to the
pancreatic duct and its different branches; 6th, it is continued into
the small and large intestines and finally terminates at the anus where
we see it identified with the skin.

The second general mucous membrane, which we have called the
genito-urinary, enters in man by the urethra, and thence is spread on
the one hand upon the bladder, the ureters, the pelvis of the kidnies,
the infundibula, the papillæ and the capillary tubes which open on
their summit; on the other hand it goes into the excretory tubes of
the prostate, into the seminal ducts, the vesiculæ seminales, the vasa
deferentia and the branches with numberless windings that produce them.

In woman, this membrane is introduced by the os externum and
penetrating on the one hand by the urethra, goes as in man upon the
urinary organs; on the other hand, we see it enter the vagina, lining
it, the uterus and the fallopian tubes, and afterwards becoming
continuous with the peritoneum by the opening of these tubes. It is the
only example in the economy, of a communication established between the
mucous and serous surfaces.

This manner of describing the course of the mucous surfaces, by saying
that they are elongated, dip down, penetrate, &c. from one cavity to
another, is no doubt not conformable to the progress of nature, which
creates in each organ the membranes belonging to this organ, and does
not thus extend them by degrees; but our manner of understanding it
is better adapted to this language, the meaning of which the least
reflection will show.

In thus referring to two general membranes all the mucous surfaces,
I am not only supported by anatomical inspection, but pathological
observation has also furnished me with points of demarcation between
the two, and points of contact between the different portions
of membranes of which each is the assemblage. In the different
descriptions of catarrhal epidemics given by authors, we frequently
see one of these membranes affected in all parts, the other remaining
sound; it is especially not rare to observe a general affection of the
first, of that which extends from the mouth, the nose, the surface of
the eye, into the alimentary canal and the bronchial vessels. The last
epidemic observed at Paris, with which Pinal himself was affected,
was of this character; that of 1761, described by Razou, had it also;
that of 1752, described in the memoirs of the Society of Edinburgh was
remarkable for a similar phenomenon; now, we do not see at that time
a corresponding affection in the mucous membrane that is spread upon
the urinary organs and upon those of generation. There is then here,
1st, an analogy between the portions of the first, by the uniformity of
affection; 2d, a demarcation between the two by the health of the one
and the disease of the other.

We see also that the irritation of any one point of one of these
membranes, frequently produces a pain in another point of the same
membrane, which is not irritated. Thus a calculus in the bladder
occasions a pain at the end of the glans penis, the presence of worms
in the intestines causes an itching of the nose, &c. &c. Now, in
these phenomena purely sympathetic, it is very rare that the partial
irritation of one of these two membranes affects with pain one of
the parts of the other; there are however examples of it; such is
the singular relation that exists, in mucous hemorrhages, between
the membrane of the womb and that of the bronchia. If the blood
ceases accidentally to flow from one during menstruation, the other
frequently exhales it and thus as it were supplies its functions.

We ought then, from inspection and observation, to consider the mucous
surface, in general, as formed by two great membranes successively
spread upon many organs, having between them no communication except
by the skin, which serves them as an intermediate organ, and which,
continuing with both, contributes thus with them to form a general
membrane everywhere, continuous, covering the animal externally, and
extending within upon most of its essential parts. We can conceive
that there should exist important relations between the internal and
external portion of this single membrane; and that they do will be
proved by further researches.


II. _Adhering Surface of the Mucous Membranes._

Every mucous membrane exhibits two surfaces, one adhering to the
neighbouring organs, the other free, covered with villi, always
moistened with a mucous fluid. Each deserves particular attention.

The adhering surface corresponds almost everywhere with the muscles,
either of animal or organic life. The mouth, the pharynx, the whole
alimentary canal, the bladder, the vagina, the womb, a portion of the
urethra, &c. exhibit a muscular layer embracing on the outside their
mucous tunic which is within. This arrangement coincides perfectly, in
animals with a fleshy membrane, with that of the skin, which moreover
approximates very near, as we shall see, the structure of the mucous
membranes, and which, as we have seen, is everywhere continuous with
them. This arrangement of the mucous membranes occasions them to be
agitated by constant motions which favour wonderfully the secretion
that takes place in them, the excretion which succeeds it, and the
various other functions of which they are the seat. The insertion
of this muscular layer exterior to the mucous system, is made, as we
have seen, by this dense and compact texture which I have called the
sub-mucous. It is from this texture, more compact than the rest of the
cellular system, that the mucous surface derives its force. It is from
it that the organ which it lines receives its form; it is this which
supports and preserves this form; the following experiment proves it.
Take a portion of the intestine; remove from any part of it this layer,
as well as the serous and the muscular; then inflate it, after having
tied it below; the air produces in this place a hernia of the mucous
coat. Try afterwards another portion of intestine; deprive this, for a
small space, of its mucous membrane and of this also; inflation will
produce upon the serous and muscular tunics the same phenomenon that
it did in the preceding on the mucous; then it is to this sub-mucous
cellular layer that it owes the resistance with which it opposes
substances that it contains. The same may be said of the stomach, the
bladder, the œsophagus, &c.


III. _Free Surface of the Mucous Membranes._

The free surface of the mucous membranes, that which is continually
moistened by the fluid from which they borrow their name, exhibits
three species of wrinkles or folds.

1st. One inherent in the structure of all the laminæ of these
membranes, is constantly met with, whatever may be their state of
dilatation or contraction; such are those of the pylorus and the valve
of Bauhin. These folds are formed not only by the mucous membrane, but
also by the intermediate tunic of which we have spoken, which here has
a remarkable density and thickness, and gives them solidity. The fleshy
tunic enters even into their composition, and we see on the exterior,
upon the serous surface, a depression that indicates their presence.

2d. Other folds, only formed by the mucous surface, exist also always
in a state of vacuity or fulness, less evident however than this; they
are owing to the circumstance that the mucous surface is much more
extensive than those upon which it is applied, so that it is folded
that it may not run a longer course; such are the valvulæ conniventes
of the small intestines, the structure of which we see very well
by cutting longitudinally one of these intestines. The edge of the
section exhibits the fleshy layer and the serous surface in a straight
direction, whilst the mucous layer describes a line resembling a loose
thread.

3d. The last species of folds is as it were accidental, and is only
observed during the contraction of the organ which is lined by the
mucous surface that is the seat of it; such are those of the interior
of the stomach, the great intestines, &c. In the greatest number of
subjects brought to the dissecting rooms, these folds of which so
much has been said as it respects the stomach, cannot be perceived in
it, because the subject has died after a disease that has so altered
the vital forces, as to prevent all action of this viscus; so that
though it is frequently found empty, its fibres are not contracted.
In experiments upon living animals, on the contrary, these folds
become very evident, and may be demonstrated in this way; make a dog
eat or drink copiously, open him an instant after and cut the stomach
in the length of its great curvature; no fold is then apparent; but
soon the viscus contracts, its edges are turned over and the aliments
escape; the whole mucous surface is covered with an infinite number
of very prominent ridges, which have as it were the form of cerebral
circumvolutions. We obtain the same result by taking out the stomach
of an animal recently killed, distending it with air and opening it
afterwards, or by cutting it immediately in its state of vacuity and
drawing it in opposite directions by its edges; it stretches, its
ridges disappear, and if we cease to distend it, they form again
immediately in an evident manner. I would observe on the subject of the
inflation of the stomach, that by distending it with oxygen, we do not
produce by the contact of this gas, greater ridges and consequently
a stronger contraction, than by using for the same purpose carbonic
acid gas. This experiment furnishes a result very similar to what I
have observed in rendering animals emphysematous by different aeriform
fluids. It follows from all that we have said upon the folds of the
mucous membranes, that in the ordinary contraction of the hollow organs
which these membranes line they undergo but a very slight diminution
of surface, that they contract scarcely at all, but fold within, so
that by dissecting them on an organ in contraction we should have a
surface almost equal in extent to that which they exhibit during its
dilatation. This assertion, which is true as it respects the stomach,
the œsophagus and the great intestines, is not perhaps as entirely so
with regard to the bladder, the contraction of which makes the ridges
within less evident; but they are not sufficient to destroy the general
law. It is also nearly the same with the gall-bladder; yet here we
find another cause. The gall-bladder, alternately observed in hunger
and during digestion, contains double the bile in the first case
that it does in the second, as I have had occasion to see very often
indeed, in experiments made for this object or with other views. Now,
when the bladder is in part empty, it does not contract upon the bile
that remains, with the force of the stomach when it contains but few
aliments, or with the power of the bladder when it contains but little
urine. It is then flaccid; so that its being distended or not has but a
slight influence upon the folds of its mucous membrane.

Besides, in saying that the mucous membranes always exhibit, with some
slight difference, the same surface in the extension and contraction
of their respective organs, I intend to speak only of the ordinary
state of the functions, and not of those enormous dilatations of
which we often see the stomach, the bladder, and more rarely the
intestines become the seat. Then there is no doubt, a real extension
and contraction, which coincide in the membrane with those of the organ.

A remarkable observation which the free surface of the mucous membranes
exhibits, and which I have already pointed out, is, that this surface
is everywhere in contact with bodies heterogenous to that of the
animal, whether these bodies introduced from without to nourish it have
not yet been assimilated to its substance, as we see in the alimentary
canal and in the wind-pipe; or whether they come from within, as we
observe in all the excretory ducts of the glands, which all open into
cavities lined by the mucous membranes, and transmit without particles
which, after having contributed for some time to the composition of
the solids, become heterogeneous to them, and are separated from them
by the constant motion of decomposition which takes place in living
bodies. Hence we ought to regard the mucous membranes as limits, and
barriers, which, placed between our organs and the bodies that are
foreign to them, defend them from the mischievous impression of these
bodies, and serve consequently within, the same functions which the
skin performs without, with respect to the bodies which surround that
of the animal, and which tend incessantly to act upon it.

The organization of the mucous system and its vital properties are
accommodated to this habitual contact of substances heterogeneous to
the living economy. That which is a foreign body to the other systems,
the cellular, the muscular, &c. is not so to this. Solid substances,
the metals, stones, wood, &c. which introduced into our parts excite
in them inevitably suppuration and an antecedent inflammation by
their simple contact, pass with impunity over this, provided that
their angles and asperities do not tear it; they only augment a
little the secretion, as I shall say. We can swallow a ball of lead,
of wood, &c. and pass it by the anus without inconvenience. All the
irritating fluids without being caustic, that we inject into the great
intestines in enemas, or that we swallow, would produce abscesses,
&c. if they were forced into the cellular system, &c. Surgeons employ
the term foreign bodies in too general a manner; that which is so
for one system, is not for another. Foreign is, in this respect, a
term of comparison which we should employ only after a knowledge of
the peculiar sensibility of each system, and not after that of this
property described in a vague manner.

The mucous system not only bears without danger the presence of all
bodies that are introduced into the economy, but also when it goes out,
it can be exposed with impunity to the contact of external stimuli.
Observe what takes place in prolapsus of the womb in which the whole
membrane of the vagina sometimes becomes external, in those inversions
of the intestinal tubes that take place through preternatural ani, in
prolapsus of the rectum, &c.; then the mucous surfaces serve really as
integuments; now in these cases the surrounding bodies produce hardly
any more pain on them than upon the skin. On the contrary, the instant
a serous surface is laid bare, as for example in the operation of
hernia, in which the intestine is suffered to come out, on account of
an opening unfortunately made by the point of a bistoury, this surface
inevitably inflames. All the cellular, muscular, nervous, glandular
systems, &c. laid bare, exhibit the same phenomenon. There is no danger
in opening the bladder as it respects the contact of the air, whilst
there is much in permitting this fluid to penetrate into an articular
cavity, a tendinous groove, a serous sac, &c. We know how much in
the high operation for the stone, we fear to wound the peritoneum,
how uncertain are the results of empyema on account of the contact
of the air upon the pleura, &c. The dangers of the action of this
fluid upon these surfaces have been perhaps exaggerated, but they are
notwithstanding real.

If a fistula extends from the exterior of the abdomen into the
intestines, its whole course is lined with callous bodies; these defend
the cellular texture and the muscles through which the fistula passes.
On the contrary, nothing similar appears upon the intestinal mucous
surface, because its organization alone is sufficient to protect it.
The urinary, salivary and lacrymal fluids never escape externally by
artificial ducts formed in the neighbouring organs, without there are
similar callous bodies in the course of these ducts; on the contrary,
they pass with impunity over the mucous surfaces. Make in a limb a
long and straight opening with a pointed instrument, and fix in it for
a time a sound; a callous canal will be produced by it. Let a sound
on the contrary remain in the urethra, no alteration of texture will
result from it.

Let us conclude from these different considerations, that the mucous
system with the cutaneous alone, is organized so as to support the
contact of all external bodies, and not to be affected by their
presence, or at least experience only an increase of secretion, which
is in no ways dangerous. Thus these two systems form two boundaries,
the one internal and the other external, between which are placed the
organs foreign, by their mode of sensibility and by that of their
structure, to the external bodies. To these boundaries the excitement
of these bodies is limited; their influence does not go beyond. So
long as they do not pass these boundaries, the other organs do not
feel them. We might say that the acute sensibility which each of them
enjoys, is a kind of sentinel that nature has placed on the confines of
the organic domain of the mind, to inform it of whatever can injure it.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


I. _Texture Peculiar to this Organization._

The mucous system presents two things to be considered in its peculiar
texture, viz. 1st, a layer more or less thick which constitutes
principally this texture, and which by analogy with the cutaneous
corion, may be called the mucous corion; 2d, many small elongations
which surmount it, and which are called villi or papillæ. As to the
epidermis which covers it, I shall treat of it with the cutaneous
epidermis. This texture has nothing similar to the substance that
colours the skin, and which is between the papillæ and epidermis. We
know in fact that negroes, as well as whites, have this texture of a
bright red, which it derives from its vessels.


_Mucous Corion._

This portion of the mucous texture, which is the most important, and
which constitutes the thickness, form, and even the nature of it, has
a soft and spongy appearance. We might say at first view that it was a
consistent pulp, with which the extremely dense cellular texture that
is subjacent to it had been covered. This softness is a character which
distinguishes it from the cutaneous corion, which moreover has by its
intimate nature but little resemblance to it.

The mucous corion is very various as to thickness; it differs in
this respect in each organ. That of the gums and the palate is the
thickest of all. Then come those of the nasal fossæ and the stomach,
then those of the small intestines and the gall-bladder, then those
of the large intestines, of the urinary bladder, the urethra and the
other excretories, until it begins at length to become so fine as to
appear transparent like a serous surface when it is removed with care.
Finally, the finest and most delicate is that of the sinuses of the
face and the interior of the ear; the arachnoides is often coarser.

I have called the texture within the ear mucous, though all anatomists
call the membrane of the cavities of this organ periosteum. In fact,
1st, we see it evidently continued with the pituitary membrane,
by means of the elongation of the Eustachian tube. 2d. We find it
constantly moistened by a mucous fluid which this canal serves to
convey out, a character foreign to the periosteum, which, like the
fibrous membranes, always adheres by both its surfaces. 3d. No fibre
can be distinguished in it. 4th. Its fungous appearance, though white
and soft, and the ease with which it is torn, are evident attributes
of the mucous membranes. Every thing proves that the membrane of the
tympanum, that of the meatus, &c. belong to the system of which we are
treating. Thus in catarrhs of the pituitary membrane, and of that of
the fauces, we most often find that the ear is affected; thus the ear
is, like the mucous surfaces, the seat of hemorrhage, thus polypi arise
in it, as in the nose and on the surface of the womb. We consider as a
sign of deposition of pus in the ear, every purulent discharge coming
from that cavity. But how can we conceive of a purulent collection in
a part in which there is hardly any cellular texture, in a part wholly
osseous? Besides the fibrous system, to which the periosteum of the
tympanum belongs, hardly ever suppurates, as we know. Every thing then
induces us to believe that these discharges are only the effect of a
catarrh of the ear, a catarrh which is sometimes acute and sometimes
chronic. I have moreover a recent and decisive fact upon this point;
the body of a man subject to these discharges during life exhibited
a remarkable thickness and redness of the membrane of the tympanum,
but without the least trace of erosion. The ear suppurates like the
urethra, the vagina, &c. it is not a new fluid which is formed by
suppuration; it is that which naturally comes from the meatus which
increases in quantity and comes through a preternatural opening of the
membrane of the tympanum.

Diseases make the thickness of all the mucous surfaces vary remarkably.
I have seen them many lines thick in the maxillary sinus, and nearly
half an inch in the bladder. In great extensions of the mucous
sacs, this thickness diminishes very much; it increases in their
contractions. The stomach especially exhibits this phenomenon in these
two opposite states.

The softness of the mucous corion is also very variable; in the nasal
fossæ, in the stomach and the intestines, it is really a kind of
organized velvet. The name of villous membrane is perfectly suited to
it. On the contrary, at the origins of the mucous system, as in the
mouth, upon the glans penis, at the entrance of the nose, it is a more
dense and compact texture, approximating nearer in its nature to the
cutaneous corion. I am persuaded that like this it might be tanned and
be useful in the arts if it were in larger pieces, whilst I doubt if
the action of tanning could produce an analogous phenomenon upon the
mucous texture of the deep-seated organs. The softness of this would
render it incapable of serving for external integuments. The least
cause would be in fact sufficient to break and tear it. Its structure
being different from that of the cutaneous corion is the reason that
the variolus pustules never appear on it, whilst we often see them on
the mucous surfaces near the openings of the skin, especially upon the
tongue, the palate and the internal surface of the cheeks.

Exposed to the action of dry air, so that it may come everywhere in
contact with it, it becomes dry and very thin, but preserves some
resistance. In bladders inflated and dried, in the stomach, the
intestines, &c. thus prepared, it is this texture which supports these
organs, and which prevents them from becoming flat, though we permit
the air to escape; it offers even a resistance, from which arises a
kind of crepitation when we wish to bend them in various directions. To
be convinced of this, it is only necessary to dry the mucous surface
separate from the serous and muscular that correspond with it; these
when dried remain pliable like the cellular texture, whilst the first
has a kind of rigidity.

In the organs in which the redness of the mucous texture is slight, as
in the bladder, the rectum, &c. it becomes transparent by drying. Where
it is very red as in the stomach, it takes a deep tinge, which becomes
even almost black if there had been an antecedent inflammation in it by
which much blood had been accumulated; hence it appears that this fluid
is the cause of the colour.

Thus dried the mucous surfaces are smooth; they lose their viscidity at
least in appearance; their folds are effaced by adhering to the surface
from which they arise; thus the valvulæ conniventes are marked in a
dried intestine, only by a red line, without any apparent prominence.
But if we macerate the intestines in this state, the folds form again
and become visible.

Exposed to a moist air, or left with other flesh that will not allow
it to become dry, the mucous corion putrefies with great ease; the
odour that it then sends out is very fetid. I think the reason why
the abdomen of dead bodies becomes putrid so soon is in part because
it contains substances already in putrefaction, and also because the
surfaces, in contact with these substances, and which by their vitality
resisted before their action, then readily yield to them. If these
substances were contiguous to aponeuroses, putrefaction would be much
less rapid. The mucous system when putrid takes a greyish colour; and
as the dense, subjacent cellular texture putrefies much less easily,
we can then remove from it by the least pressure, the mucous corion,
reduced to a putrid pulp, in which every trace of organization has
disappeared, and which forms a real pap.

During life, gangrene of the mucous texture takes place in general less
frequently than that of the cutaneous. The consequences of catarrh,
compared with those of erysipelas may convince us of this; there are
however cases in which death appears in this texture, whilst the
surrounding ones continue to live, as in gangrenous angina.

Exposed to maceration, the mucous texture yields to it promptly. I
think that next to the brain it is altered quickest by the action of
water. It is then reduced to a reddish pulp very different from that
from putrefaction in the open air. When we put the whole stomach to
macerate, this pulp is detached, when the sub-mucous texture and the
serous membrane have as yet undergone but little alteration.

Ebullition at first extracts from the mucous texture a greenish scum,
very different from that which the muscular and cellular textures
give when boiled. This scum which mixed with the whole fluid in the
beginning of the boiling, disturbs it and renders it green at first,
afterwards rises upon the surface where it has small bubbles of air
mixed with its substance; it often even falls to the bottom of the
vessel by its weight. Sulphuric acid changes the colour of it to a dull
brown.

A short time before the water begins to boil, the mucous texture
crisps and acquires the horny hardness like the others, but in a
less degree however; hence why it is then wrinkled almost always in
different directions. In fact, the sub-mucous texture upon which it is
applied, contracting at that time much more than it, it must fold on
account of its length; thus during life, when the fleshy coat of the
stomach contracts, its mucous surface not contracting in proportion,
produces the numerous folds of which we have spoken. The action of a
concentrated acid crisping the sub-mucous texture more than the mucous
itself, produces an analogous phenomenon. After having been a long time
dried, the mucous texture, like however almost all those of the animal
economy, does not lose the faculty of acquiring the horny hardness when
it is plunged into boiling water; it exhibits this phenomenon, whether
we expose it to it dry, or whether we do it after having first softened
it in cold water. It is a means by which all the valvulæ conniventes
may be made suddenly to reappear, which had disappeared by drying, and
which form again the instant the intestine contracts. This experiment
is very curious to witness.

When the ebullition has been a long time continued, the mucous texture
turns gradually to a very deep grey, from the white which it had first
become. It is not softer than in the natural state, but it breaks
much quicker; the following experiment is a proof of it. If we draw
the mucous corion, boiled for some time with the subjacent cellular
texture, this last resists the most; so that it remains entire, whilst
the mucous corion is broken in many places. This never assumes the
gelatinous appearance of the cutaneous corion or the fibrous and
cartilaginous organs when boiled and of the others which yield much
gelatine. However by mixing a solution of tannin with the water in
which this system taken from an adult has been boiled, I have seen an
evident precipitate.

The action of the acids reduces to a pulp the mucous texture much
sooner than most of the others. During life, all the caustics act
much more rapidly upon it than upon the cutaneous, of which the
thick epidermis is an intermediate organ which checks their tendency
of combining with its corion. Thus the instant the nitric acid, a
substance which common people almost always choose for their poison, as
the practice at the Hôtel Dieu proves, thus the instant I say, that the
nitric acid is in contact with the alimentary canal, it disorganizes
it, it forms there a whitish eschar, which, when death does not take
place immediately, as most often happens, is slowly removed and
detached in the form of a membrane. We know that the lips gently rubbed
with weakened nitric acid, become the seat of a troublesome itching,
whilst that oftentimes though this acid may have acted upon the skin
sufficiently to make it yellow, it does not suffer from it.

The softness of the mucous corion makes me presume that it is easily
altered by the digestive juices, not that I confide in the experiments
of Hunter, who pretended that these juices could act upon the coat that
secretes them, but because in general I have observed that the textures
like it yield very easily to the action of water in maceration and are
also very easily digested. I have not however any experiment upon the
subject, and we know that in the animal economy analogy is not always a
faithful guide.

All the mucous surfaces, but especially that of the stomach and
intestines, have the property of curdling milk, as have many other
substances, especially the acids. Is it to this property that must
be attributed a phenomenon which is constant during life, viz. the
coagulation of milk that enters the stomach for digestion? or is
this phenomenon owing to the mixture of this fluid with those which
are secreted by the surface of this organ? I think that both these
causes contribute to it at the same time; both separate produce in
fact this phenomenon. Spallanzani has proved it as it respects the
gastric juices. Every body knows that the mucous membrane dried, and
consequently deprived of these juices, preserves the property of
coagulating milk. Spallanzani has convinced himself that the serous
and organic muscular systems of the stomach are destitute of it.

Are aphthæ an affection of the mucous corion? do they belong to
the papillæ? are they seated in the glands? are they a separate
inflammation of these glands, whilst catarrhs are characterized by a
general inflammation of a considerable extent of the mucous system? All
these questions deserve to be examined. Pinel has perceived the void
there is in morbid anatomy upon this point.


_Mucous Papillæ._

The peculiar kind of sensibility which the skin enjoys is attributed
principally, as we know, to what is called the papillary body, which
commonly is not easy to be demonstrated. The sensibility of the mucous
membranes, somewhat analogous to that of the skin, appears to me to
have the same kind of organization, which is perceived with infinitely
less ease. The papillæ of this system cannot be called in question at
its origin, where it dips into the cavities, in the commencement even
of these cavities, as upon the tongue, the palate, the internal part of
the alæ of the nose, upon the glans penis, in the fossa navicularis,
within the lips, &c. Inspection is sufficient to demonstrate them
there. But it is asked if the papillæ exist also in the deep-seated
parts of this system. Analogy indicates it, since the sensibility is
as great there as at their origin, though with varieties that we shall
point out; but inspection proves it in a manner not less certain. I
think that the villi with which we everywhere see them covered are
nothing but these papillæ.

Very different ideas have been entertained of the nature of these
villi; they have been considered in the stomach and the œsophagus as
destined to the exhalation of the gastric juice, in the intestines as
serving for the absorption of chyle, &c. But, 1st, it is difficult
to conceive how an organ everywhere nearly similar, can perform in
different parts functions so different; I say nearly similar, for we
shall see that these papillæ exhibit differences of length, size,
&c. without having any of texture or structure. 2d. What can be the
functions of the villi of the pituitary membrane, of the internal
coat of the urethra, the bladder, &c. if they have not relation to
the sensibility of these membranes? 3d. The microscopical experiments
of Leiberkuhn upon the vesicle of the intestinal villi have been
contradicted by those of Hunter, of Cruikshank and especially of
Hewson. I am certain that I have never seen any thing similar on the
surface of the small intestines, at the time of chylous absorption; and
yet it would appear that a thing of inspection could not vary. 4th. It
is true that these intestinal villi are everywhere accompanied by a
vascular net-work, which gives them a red colour very different from
the colour of the cutaneous papillæ; but the non-appearance of the
cutaneous net-work is owing to the pressure of the atmospheric air, and
especially to the contraction which it occasions in the small vessels.
Observe in fact the fœtus as it comes from the womb of its mother;
its skin is as red as the mucous membranes, and if its papillæ were a
little longer, it would resemble almost exactly the internal surface
of the intestines. Who does not know moreover, that the vascular
net-work surrounding the cutaneous papillæ, is rendered evident by fine
injections, so as to change their colour entirely?

That in the stomach this vascular net-work continuous with the
exhalants furnishes the gastric juice, and that in the intestines it
intermixes with the origin of the absorbents, so that these embrace
the villi, we cannot doubt after the experiments and observations of
anatomists who have recently engaged themselves in investigating the
lymphatic system. But this does not prevent the base of these villi
from being nervous, and them from performing upon the mucous membranes
the same functions that the papillæ do upon the cutaneous organ.
This manner of regarding them by explaining their existence generally
observed upon all the mucous surfaces, appears to me to be much more
conformable to the plan of nature, than to suppose them in each place
with different and often opposite functions.

Besides it is difficult to decide the question by ocular observation.
The delicacy of these elongations conceals their structure, even
from our microscopical instruments, agents from which anatomy and
physiology do not appear to me to have derived much assistance, because
when we see obscurely, each sees in his own way and according to
his own wishes. It is then the observation of vital properties that
should especially guide us; now, it is evident to judge by them, that
the villi have the nature I have attributed to them. The following
experiment served to demonstrate to me the influence of the papillary
body upon the cutaneous sensibility; it succeeds also upon the mucous
membranes. Remove the epidermis in any part and irritate the papillary
body with a sharp stilet; the animal is agitated, cries out and gives
marks of acute pain. Slide afterwards, through a small opening made in
the skin, a pointed stilet into the sub-cutaneous cellular texture, and
irritate the internal surface of the corion; the animal remains quiet
and makes no noise, unless some nervous filaments accidentally struck
make him suffer. Hence it follows very evidently, that it is upon the
external surface of the skin that its sensibility resides, that the
nerves pass through the corion without contributing to its texture, and
that their expansion takes place on the papillary body. It is precisely
so with the mucous surfaces. Observe that this circumstance coincides
very well with the functions of the two surfaces, which receive by
their free portion the action of external bodies, to which they are
foreign by their adhering portion.

The papillæ exhibit very great varieties. On the tongue, in the small
intestines, in the stomach and in the gall-bladder, they are remarkable
for their length. The œsophagus, the large intestines, the bladder,
all the excretory ducts have those that are less evident; these last
especially and the urethra in particular, are almost smooth in their
whole mucous surface. We can scarcely distinguish the papillæ in the
frontal, sphenoidal, maxillary sinuses, &c.

These small nervous eminences are sufficiently distinct and separate
upon the tongue. In the nasal fossæ, the stomach and the intestines,
they are so near together and at the same time so delicate, that the
membrane has at first view an uniform and smooth appearance, though
it is covered with these elongations. Each papilla is simple; no
bifurcation is ever observed at its extremity. All appear to have a
pyramidal form, if we can judge at least by those which are the most
evident.

Are they susceptible of a species of erection? It has been believed
with regard to those of the tongue, which become erect, it is said, to
perceive tastes, and with regard to those of the nose, which receive
odours more efficaciously in this state of erection, which is in the
sensitive phenomena on a small scale, what the erection of the corpora
cavernosa is on a large one. I do not believe that any exact experiment
can prove this fact. Moreover, it would be necessary then that the
intestinal, vesical papillæ, &c. should be in permanent erection, since
they are almost always in contact with foreign substances.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Mucous System._

Besides the blood vessels, the exhalants and the absorbents which
contribute to the structure of this system as to that of all the
others, it exhibits also a common organ, which is found almost always
separate elsewhere, but which is here especially designed for it. This
common organ is of a glandular nature; we shall now examine it.


_Of the Mucous Glands and of the Fluids which they secrete._

The mucous glands exist in all the system of this name. Situated
beneath the corion or even in its thickness, they pour out incessantly
through imperceptible openings a mucilaginous fluid which lubricates
its free surface, and which defends it from the impression of the
bodies with which it is in contact, and at the same time favours the
course of these bodies.

These glands are very apparent in the bronchia, palate, the œsophagus
and the intestines, in which they take the names of the anatomists who
have accurately described them, and where they make in many places
evident projections upon the mucous surface. They are less apparent in
the bladder, the womb, the gall-bladder, the vesiculæ seminales, &c.;
but the mucus that moistens them clearly demonstrates their existence.
In fact, since on the one hand this fluid is analogous on all the
mucous surfaces, and, on the other, in those in which the glands are
apparent, it is evidently furnished by them, it must be secreted in the
same way in those in which the glands are less evident. The identity
of the secreted fluids supposes in fact the identity of the secretory
organs. It appears that where these glands are hidden from our view,
nature compensates for their delicacy by their number. Besides, there
are animals in which, in the intestines especially, they form by their
vast number, a kind of new layer, in addition to those of which we
have spoken. In man this is remarkable in the palatine arch, in the
pillars of the velum, on the internal surface of the lips, the cheeks,
&c. &c. There is then this great difference between the mucous and the
serous membranes, that the fluid which lubricates one is furnished by
secretion, whilst that which moistens the others is from exhalation.

The size of the mucous glands varies; those of the velum of the palate,
those of the mouth, &c. are the largest; they become insensible in
the greatest number of mucous surfaces. I dissected two subjects that
died of a pulmonary catarrh, and in them the glands of the trachea and
bronchia, which are, as we know, very apparent, were not enlarged; the
membrane alone appeared to be affected. Besides, we do not yet know the
injuries of these glands, like those of the analogous organs, which
are more apparent from their size. They are in general of a rounded
form but with many varieties. No membrane appears to cover them. They
have, like the salivary glands and the pancreas, only the cellular
texture for an envelope. Their texture is more dense and compact than
these last glands; but little cellular texture is found in them; they
are soft, vascular, and appear when opened very much like the prostate
gland. I cannot say whether nerves penetrate them; analogy indicates
it, for all the principal glands receive them.


_Mucous Fluids._

We know but little of the composition of the mucous fluids, because
in the natural state, it is difficult to collect them, and in the
morbid, in which their quantity increases as in catarrhs for example,
this composition is probably changed. We know that in general they
are unsavoury, insipid, and but slightly soluble in water, in that
even which is raised to the highest temperature; they become putrid
with difficulty. In fact they remain a long time unchanged in the
nose, exposed to the contact of a moist air; in the intestines, they
serve, without danger to them, as an envelope for putrid substances,
&c.; taken from the body and subjected to different experiments, they
give results conformable to these facts. All the acids act upon them
and colour them differently; exposed to a dry air, they thicken by
evaporation, and are often even reduced to small shining laminæ. The
nasal mucus especially exhibits this phenomenon. Fourcroy has given
in detail the analysis of this mucus; he has also given that of the
tracheal mucus. But we must not apply rigorously to the analogous
fluids our knowledge of the composition of these. It is sufficient
in fact to examine a certain number of these fluids, to be convinced
that they are not the same in any two places, that more or less thick,
more or less uniform, different in their colour, their odour even, &c.
they vary in the principles that constitute them, as the membranes
which furnish them vary in their structure, in the number and size
of their glands, in the thickness of their corion, the form of their
papillæ, the state of their vascular and nervous systems, &c. I am far
from being certain that the gastric juice is a mucous juice; it is
even probable that exhalation furnishes it, the glands of the stomach
throwing out a different fluid by the way of secretion. But this
assertion is not accurately demonstrated, and perhaps hereafter it will
be proved that this juice, so different from the other mucous juices,
is however one of them, and that its properties are distinct only
because the structure of the mucous surface of the stomach is not the
same as that of the other analogous surfaces.

The functions of the mucous fluids in the animal economy are not
ambiguous. The first of these functions is to defend the mucous
membranes from the impression of the bodies with which they are in
contact, and all which, as we have observed, are heterogeneous to that
of the animal. These fluids form upon their respective surfaces a
layer which supplies, to a certain extent, by its extreme tenuity, the
absence of their epidermis. Thus where this membrane is very apparent,
as upon the lips, the glans penis, at the entrance of the nose and in
general at all the origins of the mucous system, these fluids are not
very abundant. The skin has only an oily layer, infinitely less evident
than the mucous of which we are treating, because its epidermis is very
distinct.

This use of the mucous fluids explains why they are more abundant
where heterogeneous bodies remain some time, as in the bladder, at the
extremity of the rectum, &c. than where these bodies are only to pass,
as in the ureters, and the excretory ducts generally.

Hence why when the impression of a body would be injurious, these
fluids are poured out in greater quantity upon their surfaces. The
sound which enters the urethra and remains in it, the instrument that
is left in the vagina to compress a polypus, that which remains some
time with the same view in the nasal fossæ, the canal fixed in the
lachrymal sac to remove the obstruction, that which is introduced into
the œsophagus to assist interrupted deglutition, always produce, upon
the portions of the mucous surface that corresponds to them, a more
abundant secretion of the fluid which is constantly poured out, a true
catarrh. This is one of the principal reasons that renders it difficult
to keep elastic sounds in the wind-pipe. The abundance of the mucus
that is then secreted, by closing the openings in the instrument,
renders frequent introductions necessary, and can even threaten the
patient with suffocation, as Desault himself has observed, though
however he obtained great advantage from this means, as I have shown
in his surgical works. I ought even to say, that since the publication
of the Treatise on the Membranes, I attempted to fix a sound in the
air tube of a dog, and that the animal died at the end of some time,
having the bronchia filled with a frothy fluid which appeared to have
suffocated him.

It appears then that every considerable excitement of the mucous
surfaces produces a remarkable increase of action. But how can this
excitement, which does not take place immediately upon the gland,
have so great an influence upon it? for, as we have said, these
glands are always under the membrane, and consequently separated
by it from the irritating bodies. It appears that it is owing to a
general modification of the glandular sensibility, which is capable of
being brought into action by any irritation upon the extremity of the
excretory ducts, as I shall prove in the glandular system.

It is to the susceptibility that the mucous glands have of feeling the
irritation made at the extremity of their ducts, that must be referred
the artificial catarrhs with which Vauquelin has been affected by
respiring the vapours of the oxy-muriatic acid, the mucous discharge
that attends the presence of a polypus, of any tumour in the vagina,
of a stone in the bladder, &c. the frequency of fluor albus in women
who are immoderate in the use of sexual intercourse, the more abundant
discharge of the mucus from the nostrils of those who take snuff, &c.
In all these cases, there is evidently excitement at the extremity of
the mucous ducts. I refer also to this excitement the mucous discharge
that takes place, from stimulating the end of the nipple of a woman who
does not give suck, the copious secretions which the presence of an
irritating body produces in the intestines, secretions which especially
furnish the matter of diarrhœas, the gastric derangements which succeed
an indigestion that has allowed to remain on the mucous surface of the
stomach substances not digested and consequently irritating; these
derangements are in fact real catarrhs of the membrane of the stomach,
catarrhs which most often are not connected with bilious turgescence.
I could add many other examples of the mucous secretions increased by
an irritation upon the surface of the membranes, at the extremity of
the excretory ducts; these will be sufficient to give an idea of the
others.

All these excitements produce a kind of inflammation, the peculiarity
of which is to contract at first for some time the glandular ducts, and
arrest the secretion, which they afterwards excite in great quantity.
When the mucous fluids have flowed abundantly for some time, they
gradually diminish though the cause continues; thus less mucus is
discharged from the urethra in proportion after the sound has remained
in it a month, than when first introduced; but almost always as long as
the cause continues, the mucous discharge is greater than in a natural
state.

Blisters are much employed in medicine on the cutaneous organ, to
dispel, according to some, the morbific humour, and overcome, according
to others, a natural irritation by an artificial one. Why should we
not also in many cases irritate the mucous surfaces? why not act upon
the pituitary membrane, upon the glans penis, upon the membrane of the
urethra, upon the pharynx, &c. and especially upon the uvula which is
so sensible? why, instead of epispastics upon the perineum and sacrum,
should we not introduce a sound into the urethra for a paralysis of the
bladder? Instead of acting in hemiplegia upon the cutaneous organ, I
have already twice employed the following means; I have introduced a
sound into the urethra, one in each nasal fossa, and at the same time,
a surgeon irritated at intervals the uvula; the patients appeared to be
much more excited than by blisters. Very strong purgative enemas and
emetics prove the advantage of the excitement of the mucous membranes
in this case. Would it not often be better in ophthalmia, to produce
an artificial catarrh in the nostril of the diseased side, than to
put a blister or seton in the neck? I have once tried it; it did not
succeed; but the ophthalmia was of long standing; I propose to repeat
these experiments at the Hôtel Dieu upon a great number of patients. I
think that we might often in diseases make use of mucous excitements
instead of cutaneous, with much more advantage, because in the mucous
system the contact of a body is sufficient, and it is not necessary to
produce, by removing the epidermis, a kind of ulcer.

The mucous membranes by the continual secretion of which they are
the seat, enjoy a principal part in the animal economy. We ought to
consider them as one of the great emunctories by which the residue of
nutrition constantly escapes, and consequently as one of the principal
agents of the habitual decomposition which removes from living bodies
the particles that, having for some time contributed to the composition
of the solids, are afterwards to become heterogeneous to them. Observe
in fact that the mucous fluids do not enter the circulation, but go out
of the body; that of the bladder, the ureters and the urethra, with
the urine; that of the vesiculæ seminales and the different ducts with
the semen; that of the nostrils by the act of blowing the nose; that
of the mouth, in part by evaporation and in part by the anus with the
excrements; that of the bronchia, by pulmonary exhalation, which arises
principally, as I shall say, from the solution of this mucous fluid in
the inspired air; those of the œsophagus, the stomach, the intestines,
the gall-bladder, &c. with the excrements, of which they often form
in the ordinary state a part almost as considerable as the residue
of the aliments, and which they even compose almost entirely in some
cases of dysentery and fever, in which the quantity of matter voided
is evidently disproportioned to that taken in, &c. Let us observe upon
this subject that there are always some errors in the analyses of the
fluids in contact with the membranes of which we are speaking, as in
that of the urine, the bile, the gastric juices, &c. because it is very
difficult and even impossible to separate the mucous fluids from them.

If we recollect what has been previously said upon the extent of the
two general mucous surfaces, which is equal and even superior to the
extent of the cutaneous organ, and if we afterwards consider that
these two great surfaces are constantly throwing out mucous fluids, we
shall perceive how important this evacuation must be in the economy,
and of what mischief its derangement must become the source. It is
undoubtedly to this law of nature which wishes to have every mucous
fluid thrown out, that must be attributed, in part in the fœtus, the
presence of the unctuous fluid of which the gall-bladder is full, the
meconium which loads the intestines, &c. fluids which appear to be but
a mass of mucous juices, which being unable to pass off, remain until
birth, without being absorbed, upon the respective organs on which they
have been secreted.

The mucous fluids are not the only ones that are thrown out, and are
in this way excrementitious substances to the economy; this is the
case with almost all the fluids separated from the mass of blood by
secretion; this is evident as it respects the greatest part of the
bile; probably the saliva, the pancreatic juice and the tears are
also thrown out with the excrements, and their colour alone prevents
them from being distinguished like the bile. I do not even know if,
by reflecting on many phenomena, we might not attempt to establish as
a general principle, that every fluid separated by secretion does not
enter the circulation again, that this phenomenon belongs only to the
fluids separated by exhalation, as those of the serous cavities, of the
articulations, of the cellular texture, of the medullary organ, &c.;
that all the fluids are thus either excrementitious or recrementitious,
and that no one is excremento recrementitious as the common division
implies. The bile in the gall-bladder, the urine in the bladder, the
semen in the vesiculæ seminales, are certainly absorbed; but it is not
the fluid itself which re-enters the circulation; it is only its most
delicate parts, some of its principles which we do not exactly know,
probably the serous and lymphatic part; this does not resemble the
absorption of the pleura and other analogous membranes, in which the
fluid re-enters the blood as it came out of it.

That which is certain on the subject of the excretion of the secreted
fluids is, that I have never been able to produce absorption of the
bile by the lymphatics by injecting it into the cellular texture of
an animal; it produces there inflammation and afterwards suppuration.
We know that urine effused is not absorbed and that it destroys every
part it touches, whilst that effusions of lymph and blood are easily
discussed. There is as it respects the composition an essential
difference between the blood and the secreted fluids. The exhaled
fluids on the contrary, as the serum, in this respect resemble it very
much.

Another very evident proof that all the mucous fluids are designed to
be thrown out, is, that when they have continued for some time in any
quantity upon their respective surfaces, they create there a painful
sensation of which nature relieves us by various means. Thus the
cough, which is the constant result of an accumulation of mucus in the
bronchia, serves to expel it; thus vomiting in gastric derangements
answers the same purpose as it respects the mucous juices accumulated
in the stomach, whose presence produces a weight and even pain, though
the membranes be not affected. We cough at will, because it is the
diaphragm and intercostals by which this function is performed; we do
not seek in medicine for any means to excite it. But as we cannot vomit
at will, and as the presence of mucous juices often by fatiguing the
stomach, does not irritate it sufficiently to produce a contraction,
art has recourse to various emetics. We know what a painful sensation
of weight the continuance of mucus accumulated in the frontal,
maxillary, sinuses, &c. occasions, when there is a catarrh of a portion
of the pituitary membrane. The region of the bladder is for the same
reason, in catarrhs of this organ, the seat of a troublesome and even
painful sensation.

In general, the sensation which arises from the presence of the
mucous juices remaining too long and in too great quantity upon their
respective surfaces, varies because, as we shall see, each part of
the mucous system has its peculiar mode of sensibility; so that the
pain is not the same in each, though produced by the same cause. I
would only observe that this sensation does not resemble that which
arises from the tearing or the acute irritation of our parts; it is an
uneasy, inconvenient sensation, difficult to be borne. Every one knows
that which arises from mucus accumulated in the nasal fossæ, when the
nose has not been blown for a long time, that disagreeable one that
accompanies gastric derangements, &c. Those who have a weakness of
the lachrymal sac in which the tears, on account of this, accumulate
during the night, wake up with a sensation of weight, of which they are
relieved by evacuating the sac by pressure, if the puncta lachrymalia
are open.


_Blood Vessels._

The mucous membranes receive a very great number of vessels. The
remarkable redness that distinguishes them would be sufficient to
prove it, if injections did not demonstrate it; this redness is not
everywhere uniform. It is almost nothing in the sinuses of the face, in
the internal ear, of which the membranes are rather whitish, and which
appear so especially, because their extreme delicacy allows the bone
upon which they are applied to be seen very distinctly. In the bladder,
in the great intestines, in the excretories, &c. this colour, though
still very pale, is a little more evident; it becomes very much so in
the stomach, the small intestines, the vagina and in the pituitary and
palatine membranes. In the gall-bladder we cannot distinguish it,
because the bile always covers the mucous surface in the dead body.

This colour depends upon a very extensive vascular net-work, the
branches of which, after having passed through the mucous corion,
and ramifying there, divide and spread ad infinitum on its surface,
embracing the papillary body and covered only by the epidermis.

It is the superficial position of these vessels and consequently
their want of support on one side, that exposes them frequently to
ruptures from considerable shocks, as happens on the surface of the
bronchia from a severe cough, on that of the ear and the nose from a
violent blow on the head. We know that hemorrhage of the mucous system
bordering on the brain, is a common accident from concussions and
wounds of the head. Hence why the least gravel makes the ureters bleed;
why one of the signs of stone in the bladder is the passing of blood;
why a blunt sound carefully introduced is so often withdrawn bloody
from the urethra; why the least effort made with instruments carried
upon polypi, into a fistula lachrymalis or into the nostrils, produces
hemorrhage. I have already observed that we must carefully distinguish
these hemorrhages from those furnished by the exhalants, and which do
not suppose any vascular rupture.

It is also the superficial position of the vessels of the mucous
system, which makes its portions visible, as the red edge of the
lips, the glans penis, &c. often serve to show us the state of the
circulation. Thus in the different species of asphyxia, in submersion,
strangulation, &c. these parts are remarkably livid, an effect of the
passage of the venous blood, which has undergone no change from the
want of respiration, into the extremities of the arterial system.

The long continued exposure of the mucous system to the air, often
makes it lose the redness that characterizes it, and it then
assumes the appearance of the skin, as has been observed by Sabatier
in treating of prolapsus of the womb and vagina, which, from this
circumstance, have sometimes so misled some people, as to make them
believe it a case of hermaphrodism.

An important question presents itself in the history of the vascular
system of the mucous membranes, viz. whether this system admits more
or less blood according to different circumstances. As the organs
within which these membranes are spread, are almost all susceptible of
contraction and dilatation, as we see in the stomach, the intestines,
the bladder, &c. it has been thought that during the dilatation, the
vessels being more expanded, receive more blood, and that during the
contraction on the contrary, being folded up, as it were choaked,
they admit but a small quantity of this fluid which then flows into
the neighbouring organs. Chaussier has made an application of these
principles to the stomach, whose circulation he has considered as being
alternately inverse of that of the omentum, which receives during the
vacuity of this organ, the blood which this when it is contracted
cannot admit. An analogous use has also been attributed to the spleen
since the time of Lieutaud. The following is what the inspection of
animals opened during abstinence and at different periods of digestion,
has shown me upon this point.

1st. During the fulness of the stomach the vessels are more apparent on
the exterior of this viscus, than when it is empty. Within, the mucous
surface is not more red, sometimes it has appeared to me to be less
so. 2d. The omentum, less extended during the fulness of the stomach,
exhibits nearly the same number of vessels, as long, but more tortuous,
than when it is empty. If they contain less blood, the difference is
hardly sensible. I would observe, that in order to distinguish this
well, it is necessary to take care that in opening the animal, the
blood does not fall on the omentum which presents itself, and thus
prevent its state from being ascertained. This is besides a necessary
consequence of the arrangement of the vascular system of the stomach.
In fact the great stomachic coronary being situated transversely
between it and the omentum, and furnishing branches to each, it is
evident that when the stomach is lodged between the layers of the
omentum by separating these layers, and this by applying itself upon
it becomes shorter; it is evident, I say, that the branches which it
receives from the coronary cannot be equally applied to it also. In
order to do this, it would be necessary that they should go from one
to the other without the intermediate trunk that cuts them at right
angles; then, in distending, the stomach would separate them as it
does the omentum, and would be lodged between them; whereas it pushes
them before it with their common trunk, the stomachic coronary, and
makes them fold. 3d. I am confident that there is no such constant
relation between the size of the spleen and the emptiness or fulness
of the stomach, and that these two circumstances coincide necessarily,
and that if the first organ increases or diminishes under different
circumstances, it is not always precisely the reverse of the stomach.
I first made, like Lieutaud, experiments upon dogs to convince myself
of it; but the inequality in the size and age of those that were
brought to me, making me fear that I should not be able to compare
their spleens correctly, I repeated them upon guinea-pigs of the same
litter and size, and examined at the same time, some when the stomach
was empty and others when it was full. I have almost always found the
size of the spleen nearly equal, or at least the difference was not
very sensible. Yet in other experiments, I have seen under various
circumstances, inequalities in the size of the spleen and especially
in the weight of this viscus; but it was indifferently during or after
digestion.

It appears from all this, that if during the vacuity of the stomach,
there is a reflux of blood towards the omentum and spleen, this reflux
is less than it has been commonly said to be. Besides during this
state of vacuity, the numerous folds of the mucous membrane of this
viscus leaving it, as we have said above, almost as much surface and
consequently as many vessels as during fulness, the blood can circulate
in it almost as freely. It has no real obstacles but in the tortuous
courses, and not in the obstruction, compression and choaking of these
vessels by the contraction of the stomach; now this obstacle is easily
surmounted, or rather it is not one as I have proved in my Researches
upon Death. As to the other hollow organs, it is difficult to examine
the circulation of the neighbouring parts during their fulness and
vacuity, as the vessels of these are not superficial as in the omentum,
and as they themselves are not insulated like the spleen. We can only
then, to decide the question, see the state of the mucous membranes on
their internal face; now this face has always appeared to me to be as
red during the contraction as during the dilatation.

Besides I only give this as a fact without pretending to draw from it
any consequence in opposition to the common opinion. It is possible in
fact that though the quantity of blood may be nearly always the same,
the rapidity of the circulation being increased, more of this fluid may
consequently in a given time enter it when it is full; which appears
to be necessary to the greater secretion that then takes place of the
mucous fluids, a secretion excited by the presence of the substances in
contact with the surfaces of the same name. For example, there is no
doubt that there is three or even four times as much mucus secreted in
the urethra, when a sound fills it, as when it is empty; now the blood
must be in proportion.

The remarkable redness of the mucous system, the analogy of respiration
in which the blood flows through the mucous surface of the bronchia
the well known experiment of a bladder filled with blood and immersed
in oxygen, by which means the blood becomes red, have induced a belief
that the blood being separated from the atmospheric air only by a thin
pellicle or some of the mucous surfaces, as upon the pituitary, the
palatine, the glans penis, &c. assumed there a redder colour, either
from getting rid of a portion of its carbonic acid gas, or by combining
with the oxygen of the air, and that these membranes thus performed
functions accessory to those of the lungs. The experiments of Jurine
upon the cutaneous organ, experiments adopted by many celebrated
philosophers, seem to strengthen this conjecture.

I tried the following experiment to ascertain this fact. I drew through
a wound made in the abdomen a portion of intestine which I tied at one
point, I afterwards reduced it, keeping out a small portion only which
I opened and by which I introduced atmospheric air, which filled the
whole portion situated on this side of the ligature. I afterwards tied
the intestine below the opening, and reduced the whole of it. At the
end of an hour, the animal being opened, I compared the blood of the
mesenteric veins which arose from the portion of intestine distended
with air, with the blood of the other mesenteric veins arising from the
rest of the canal. No difference of colour was manifest; the internal
surface of the distended portion of the intestine was not of a more
brilliant red. I thought I should obtain a more evident effect, by
repeating with oxygen the same experiment upon another animal; but I
perceived no greater variety in the colour of the blood. As upon the
mucous membranes which are ordinarily in contact with the air, this
fluid is constantly changing and is agitated by a perpetual motion,
and as in the preceding experiment it remained stagnant, I attempted
to produce the same effect in the intestines. I made two openings in
the abdomen, and drew out at each a portion of the intestinal canal;
having opened these two portions, I fitted to one the tube of a bladder
full of oxygen and to the other that of an empty bladder; I afterwards
compressed the full bladder, so as to make the oxygen pass into the
other, by going through this portion of intestine, left in the abdomen
that the heat might support the circulation in it. The oxygen was
thus many times sent from one bladder to another, taking its course
through the intestine, which, on account of its contractility is more
difficult than it at first seems to be. The abdomen being afterwards
opened I found no difference between the venous blood returning from
this portion of intestine, and that which flowed from the others. The
superficial position of the mesenteric veins, covered only by a fine
and transparent layer of peritoneum, their size, if the animal be
rather large, render this sort of comparison very easy.

I perceive that we cannot infer from what takes place in the
intestines, what happens in the pituitary, palatine membrane, &c.
because though analogous, the organization may be different. We cannot
here as in the intestines examine the venous blood returning from the
part; but, 1st, if we consider that in animals who have respired oxygen
for some time, we see the palatine and pituitary membranes more red;
2d, if we reflect that the lividity of the different parts of this
membrane, in those destroyed by asphyxia by the carbonic acid gas,
depends not on the immediate contact of this gas upon the membrane,
but upon the passage of venous blood into the arterial system, as my
experiments have, I think, demonstrated; 3d, if we remark finally
that in these circumstances the contact of the air does not change,
after death, the lividity which the venous blood gives to the mucous
membranes, although the skin be then much more permeable to every
kind of aeriform fluid; we shall see that it is at least necessary to
suspend our judgment upon the colouring of the blood in the mucous
membranes, until further observations have decided the question.

The following experiment may also throw some light upon the subject.
I have inflated the peritoneal cavity of several guinea-pigs with
carbonic acid gas, with hydrogen, oxygen and atmospheric air, to see if
I could effect through a serous membrane what I could not make succeed
in a mucous; I have not, after these experiments, found any difference
in the colour of the blood of the abdominal system; it was always the
same as in the common guinea-pig which I killed for comparison.

I think however that I have remarked many times, both in frogs and
animals with red and warm blood, such as cats and guinea-pigs, that
the infiltration of oxygen into the cellular texture gives, at the end
of some time, a much brighter colour to the blood, than that which
this fluid exhibits in artificial emphysemas produced by carbonic
acid gas, hydrogen and atmospheric air, in all which the colour of
the blood scarcely differs at all from what is natural. But in other
cases oxygen has had no influence upon the colour of the blood; so
that notwithstanding having made many experiments upon this point, I
am unable to give any general result. It appears that the tonic forces
of the cellular texture and of the parietes of the vessels which are
spread upon this texture, receive a very variable influence from
the contact of the gases, and that according to the nature of this
influence, the fibres crisping and contracting more or less, render
these parts more or less permeable, either to the aeriform fluids
that tend to escape from the blood in order to unite with that of the
emphysema, or to this last fluid, if it tends to combine with the
blood, which no doubt produces the varieties I have observed.

The red colour of the mucous system is analogous to that of the
muscular system. It does not depend essentially on the blood
circulating in the small arteries of this system. It arises from
the colouring portion of the blood combined with the mucous texture,
especially in the deep part of the organs; for at the origin of the
mucous surfaces, this colour appears to be principally owing to the
blood in circulation; in fact asphyxia does not render so livid the
deep mucous surfaces, as it does those which are superficial and in
communication with the skin. The black blood arrives immediately to
these by the last arteries, and tinges them as we see. In syncope in
which the heart being affected no longer sends blood into the arteries,
we know that this portion of the mucous system becomes instantly white.

Besides the red colour of the deeper portions, can, like that of the
muscles, be removed by repeated washing and frequently changing the
water. Yet the water in which they have been washed is not as red as
that used for the muscles.

The instant a mucous surface is plunged into boiling water, however
red it may be, as that of the intestines and the stomach, it instantly
whitens. The action of the nitric, sulphuric and muriatic acids
produces in it also a sudden whiteness.

This colour of the mucous surfaces acquires a remarkable intensity in
inflammation. The redness becomes then extremely deep on account of the
quantity of blood that is accumulated in the capillary system. It is
particularly in dysentery that the internal surface of the intestines
exhibits this phenomenon in a striking degree. I ought however to
observe to those who open dead bodies, that they never should lose
sight of the original tinge of the portion of the mucous system they
examine, since each of the divisions of this system exhibits in its
shades remarkable differences. If the membrane of the bladder, the
rectum, &c. is found as red as that of the stomach in its natural
state, then pronounce that there had been inflammation; if the redness
of the sinuses equals that which is natural to the bladder and the
rectum, decide that inflammation had existed in them. There is, as
I have said, a scale of colour for the mucous system. It is then
essential to have an accurate knowledge of this scale, a type to which
we can refer the inflammatory state in the examination of dead bodies.


_Exhalants._

Does exhalation take place upon the mucous surfaces? The analogy of the
skin seems to indicate it; for it is well proved that the sweat is not
a transudation through the inorganic pores of the cutaneous surface,
but a real transmission by vessels of a peculiar nature and continuous
with the arterial system.

It appears at first that the pulmonary perspiration which takes place
upon the mucous surface of the bronchia, which has so much relation
with that of the skin, which increases and diminishes according as this
diminishes or increases, and the matter of which is probably of the
same nature; it appears, I say, that the pulmonary perspiration is made
at least in great part by the system of exhalant vessels, and that if
the combination of the oxygen of the air with the hydrogen of the blood
contributes to produce it, during the act of respiration, it is but
in very small quantity, and it is the portion that is purely aqueous.
Besides, this last hypothesis of modern chemists, contradictory to the
production of all the other fluids thrown out by the mucous surfaces,
appears to me ill adapted to explain the formation of this. When the
same phenomenon is produced in many places, and the explanation that is
given of it is applicable only to one, we should be suspicious of this
explanation.

It should be observed in regard to the pulmonary perspiration, that the
solution of the mucous fluid which lubricates the bronchia, in the air
constantly inspired and expired, furnishes a considerable portion of
this vapour which, insensible in summer, is very evident in winter, on
account of the condensation of the air. The mucous juices are dissolved
like every other fluid; for wherever there is atmospheric air, heat and
moisture, there is evaporation. Here this evaporation is even a means
which nature employs to rid herself, as I have said, of the mucous
juices. If they are too abundant, as in a cold, then the quantity of
air which serves as a vehicle to them, not increasing in proportion,
it is necessary that there should be another mode of evacuation; this
is expectoration which compensates for what the air cannot remove by
solution.

The intestinal juice which Haller has especially considered, but
which appears to be in much less quantity than he thought it, the
œsophagean and gastric juices, particularly this last which has been
supposed to be distinct from the mucous juices, are probably deposited
by exhalation upon their respective mucous surfaces. But in general
it is very difficult to distinguish with precision what belongs in
these organs to the exhalant system, from that which is furnished by
the system of mucous glands, which, as we have said, are everywhere
subjacent to them. Thus we constantly see the mucous fluids of the
œsophagus, the stomach and the intestines, mixing with the œsophagean,
gastric and intestinal fluids.

As on the one hand the blood vessels ramify almost naked on the mucous
surfaces, and as on the other these vessels are always the origin of
the exhalants, it is evident, that these have but a short course to
run to arrive at their surfaces; they are rather pores than distinct
vessels. Hence why no doubt the blood has so great a tendency to escape
by the exhalants; why consequently hemorrhages without rupture are so
frequent in the mucous system; why this affection can be classed in
the diseases of this system, &c. &c. No other, by the arrangement of
the arteries, offers to the exhalants so short a course between their
origin and termination. Often even, as I have said, we make the blood
of these vessels ooze in the dead body through their exhalants.


_Absorbents._

The absorption of the mucous membranes is evidently proved, 1st,
by those of chyle and of drinks on the intestinal surfaces, of the
venereal virus upon the glans penis and the canal of the urethra,
of the variolous when the gums are rubbed with it, of the serous
portion of the bile, the urine and the semen, when they remain in
their respective reservoirs. 2d. When, in the paralysis of the fleshy
fibres that terminate the rectum, substances are accumulated at the
extremity of this intestine, these substances often become hard, an
effect probably of an absorption of the soft parts. 3d. There have been
various cases in which the urine has been almost wholly absorbed by the
mucous surface of the bladder, where there have been insurmountable
obstacles in the urethra. 4th. If we respire, by means of a tube,
the air of a large vessel filled with the exhalations of turpentine,
so that these vapours can only act upon the mucous surface of the
bronchia, the urine has the peculiar odour that always arises from the
use of this substance, the exhalations from which have been introduced
into the blood by the means of absorption, &c.

Whatever may be the mode of this absorption, it appears that it does
not take place in a constant and uninterrupted manner, like those of
the serous membranes, in which the exhalant and absorbent systems are
in a regular and continual alternation of action. There is scarcely any
but the chylous absorption, that of drinks, and that of the aqueous
portion of the secreted fluids remaining in a reservoir as they come
from their glands, that constantly take place. Nothing is more variable
than the other absorptions. Under the same influence, the glans takes
up or leaves the venereal virus; the internal surface of the bronchia
sometimes admits and sometimes refuses admittance to contagious
miasmata. There are more cases of retention in which the urine is not
absorbed entirely, than there are where this absorption takes place,
&c. &c. The innumerable varieties of the vital forces of the mucous
membranes, varieties produced by those of the stimuli with which they
are in contact, explain these phenomena. If these forces are raised
or diminished a little, the absorption is altered, even that which is
natural, as that of the chyle. Take a purgative; it contracts, shuts
even the mouth of the absorbents of the intestinal canal; as long as
the irritation continues, all the drinks that are taken pass off by
the anus; at the end of four or five hours, the absorbents gradually
recover their natural tone and absorption recommences. In these cases,
the first discharges are only the intestinal matters, the others are
the copious drinks that have been taken. There are many diseases in
which, the sensibility of the chylous absorbents being too much raised,
they are no longer in relation with the aliments, they take up with
difficulty the residue of them, &c. Deficiency of action produces
the same phenomenon; in absorption in fact it is a middle degree of
sensibility of the organ which produces it, a degree below or above
which it cannot take place.

All the mucous absorbents appear to go to the thoracic duct.


_Nerves._

I would remark that at all the origins of the mucous system, where the
animal sensibility is very great and where it places us, like the skin,
in relation with external bodies, cerebral nerves are distributed. The
pituitary and palatine membranes, the conjunctiva, the mucous surface
of the rectum, the glans penis, the prepuce, &c. exhibit this fact very
evidently. There are hardly any nervous filaments coming from the
ganglions in these different places.

On the contrary, this last species of nerves is the predominant one
in the intestines, in all the excretories, in the reservoirs of the
secreted fluids, &c. places where the organic sensibility is the most
evident.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


I. _Properties of Texture._

Extensibility and contractility are much less in this system than
they at first appear to be, on account of the numerous folds which it
exhibits in the hollow organs during their contraction, folds which
are developed only during extension, as we have seen. Yet these two
properties become very evident in some cases. The excretories are
capable of taking a size much larger than is natural to them. This is
seen in the ureters in particular, which are sometimes found as large
as an intestine. The ductus choledochus and the pancreatic duct have
often also these dilatations. The urethra and the salivary ducts appear
to be less extensible than the others. If they have ever so little
obstacles from strictures, contractions, &c. they break rather than
stretch; hence various urinary and salivary fistulas.

Hence there is, as we see, many varieties in the degrees of the
extensibility of the mucous system; it is the same with regard to the
contractility of texture. These two properties are besides capable
of being put rapidly into action. We know that the stomach, the
intestines, the bladder, &c. pass in an instant from a great size
to extreme contraction. Their functions even suppose this rapidity,
without which they could not be performed. The palatine membrane which
lines the cheeks, exhibits the same phenomenon when the mouth is filled
with air, aliments, &c. which are afterwards expelled from it.

When the usual fluids cease to pass through the mucous ducts, they
remain in permanent contraction; this is what takes place in the
intestines below a preternatural anus. I have seen in this case the
cæcum and the rectum reduced to the size of a large quill. Yet there
is never then an obliteration of their parietes, on account of the
presence of the mucous juices, of which the patient always passes
a certain quantity. The urethra, after the operations for stone in
which the urine passes for a long time through the wound, and in the
great fistulas in the perineum or above the pubis, the salivary ducts
in wounds which affect them and through which the whole saliva is
discharged, the nasal canal in fistulæ lachrymales, contract also more
or less, but are never obliterated. We know that the vas deferens is
often a very long time without having semen pass through it, and yet
it remains open. This phenomenon distinguishes the mucous ducts from
the arterial, which, when the course of blood is interrupted in them,
change into ligaments in which every thing like a canal disappears. We
ought not to lose sight of this phenomenon of all the mucous ducts; it
proves the incorrectness of the practice of those who, thinking that at
the end of some time it is impossible to re-establish, in fistulas, the
natural way, think it necessary to make an artificial one.

The mucous tubes are not only not obliterated when they are empty, but
when inflamed they do not even contract adhesions of their parietes,
as so often happens in the serous cavities, in the cellular texture,
&c. Observe how important this fact is to the great functions of life;
what would indeed become of these functions, if in catarrhs of the
intestines, the bladder, the stomach, the œsophagus, the excretories,
&c. these adhesions were as frequent as they are in pleurisy,
peritonitis, pericarditis, &c.


II. _Vital Properties._

Few systems live in a more active manner than this; few exhibit the
vital forces in a higher degree.


_Properties of Animal Life._

Constantly in relation, like the integuments, with external bodies, the
mucous surfaces have occasion for a sensibility which would enable the
mind to perceive these relations, especially at the origin of these
surfaces. Thus the animal sensibility is very much developed there. It
is even superior in it in many places to that of the cutaneous organ,
in which no sensation is as acute as those which take place on the
pituitary membrane from odours, upon the palatine from tastes, upon the
surface of the vagina, the urethra, the glans penis during coition. But
without speaking of these exaggerations of sensibility, if I may so
express myself, all the natural phenomena of the mucous surfaces prove
this property in an evident manner; it is unnecessary however to pause
for these phenomena.

I would only observe that this sensibility, like that of the cutaneous
organ, is essentially subjected to the powerful influence of habit,
which tending constantly to blunt the acuteness of the sensation of
which they are the seat, brings equally to indifference the pain and
the pleasure they make us experience, and of which it is the medium,
as we know. 1st. I say that habit brings to indifference the painful
sensations arising upon the mucous membranes. The presence of a sound
in the urethra for the first time, is distressing the first day,
painful the second, inconvenient the third, and insensible the fourth.
Pessaries introduced into the vagina, bougies into the rectum, tents
fixed in the nasal fossæ, and a canula kept for a length of time in the
nasal canal, exhibit in different degrees the same phenomena. It is
upon this remark that is founded the possibility of the introduction of
sounds into the wind-pipe to aid respiration, and into the œsophagus to
produce an artificial deglutition. This law of habit can even transform
into a pleasure an impression at first painful; the use of snuff
for the pituitary membrane and different aliments for the palatine,
furnish well known examples of this. 2d. I say that habit brings to
indifference agreeable sensations arising on the mucous surfaces; the
perfumer, placed in an odoriferous atmosphere, the cook, whose palate
is constantly affected by delicious tastes, do not find in their
professions the acute enjoyments they give to others. From habit can
even arise the succession from pleasure to painful sensations, as in
the preceding case it converts pain to pleasure.

I would however observe that this remarkable influence of habit is only
exerted upon sensations produced by simple contact, and not upon those
produced by real injuries, as the tearing, the forced stretching, the
cutting or pinching of the mucous system; thus it does not mitigate
the pains caused in the bladder by pressure and by the tearing a stone
occasions, or on the surface of the womb, of the nasal fossæ, &c. by
a polypus, on that of the œsophagus or the wind-pipe by a sharp and
uneven body accidentally lodged there, &c. &c.

It is to this power of habit over the sensibility of the mucous system,
that must be in part referred the gradual diminution of its functions,
which accompanies age. Every thing is stimulant in infancy, every
thing is blunted in old age. In one, the very active sensibility of
the alimentary, biliary, urinary, salivary surfaces, &c. contributes
principally to produce that rapidity with which the digestive and
secretory phenomena succeed each other; in the other, this sensibility
blunted by habitual contact, connects but slowly the same phenomena.

Is it not from the same cause that arises this remarkable modification
of the sensibility of this system, viz. that at its origins, as upon
the pituitary, the palatine membranes, the œsophagus, the glans penis,
the opening of the rectum, &c. it gives us the sensation of the bodies
with which it is in contact, and that it does not give this sensation
in the very deep organs which it lines, as in the intestines, the
excretories, the gall-bladder, &c.? In the interior of the organs,
this contact is always uniform; the bladder only knows the contact
of the urine, the gall-bladder that of the bile, the stomach that of
the aliments masticated and reduced, whatever may be their diversity,
to an uniform, pulpy mass. This uniformity of sensation produces no
perception, because in order to perceive, it is necessary to compare,
and here the two terms of comparison are wanting. Thus the fœtus has no
sensation of the waters of the amnios; thus, the air, very irritating
to a new born infant, becomes insensible to it. On the contrary, at the
beginning of the mucous membranes, the stimulants vary every instant;
the mind can then perceive the presence of them, because it can
establish approximations between their different modes of action. What
I say is so true, that if in the interior of the organs, the mucous
membranes are in contact with a foreign body, different from that which
they are accustomed to, they transmit the sensation of it to the mind.
A catheter in the bladder, sounds introduced into the stomach, &c. are
examples of this. Fresh air, in great heat of the atmosphere, suddenly
introduced into the trachea, carries an agreeable sensation over the
whole surface of the bronchia; but habit soon renders us insensible to
it and we cease to have the perception of it. Yet it is to be observed
that when the intestines come out in preternatural inversions of the
anus, their sensibility never becomes so acute as that of the palatine,
pituitary surfaces, &c. &c. The absence of cerebral nerves no doubt has
an influence upon this phenomenon.

The sensibility of the mucous system is much raised in inflammations;
acute catarrhs are, as we know, very painful. The contact of bodies is
then not only felt, but is very disagreeable. I would observe however
that the sensibility never rises so high as it does in the inflamed
cellular, serous, fibrous systems, &c. A phlegmon, a pleurisy, &c.
compared with a catarrh, are sufficient to convince us of this. We may
say that the organs least accustomed to feel in the natural state,
experience in diseases the most acute sensations.

There is no animal contractility in the mucous system.


_Properties of Organic Life._

Organic sensibility and insensible contractility are very evident in
the mucous system. They are constantly put in action in it by four
different causes; 1st, by the nutrition of this system; 2d, by the
absorption that takes place in it, either naturally or accidentally;
3d, by its exhalation; 4th, by the constant secretion of its glands.
These two properties are the original causes of all these functions,
the increase and diminution of which are truly the indices of the state
of these glands. As a thousand causes continually act upon the mucous
surfaces, as a thousand different stimuli continually excite them,
especially at their origin, this state is incessantly varying like the
functions that result from it.

The mucous system differs then from most of the others; 1st, in
this, that the organic sensibility and the insensible contractility
are habitually more exalted in it, on account of the more numerous
functions over which they preside; 2d, in this, that they incessantly
vary, on account of the variety of the stimuli. Observe in fact that,
in the osseous, fibrous, cartilaginous, muscular, nervous systems, &c.
on the one hand, these properties are put in action only by nutrition;
and on the other, no stimulant being in contact with these systems,
they always remain at the same degree.

Hence it is not astonishing that the diseases which especially put in
action the organic sensibility and the insensible contractility of
the same species, should be so frequent in the mucous organs. All the
catarrhal affections, both acute and chronic, all the hemorrhages,
various and numerous tumours, polypi, fungi, &c. all kinds of
excoriations, ulcers, &c. of which they are the seat, are derived
from the various alterations of which their organic properties are
susceptible.

It is also to these alterations that must be attributed a remarkable
phenomenon, viz. the innumerable varieties the mucous fluids exhibit in
diseases. Take for example those that are thrown off from the internal
surface of the bronchia, those that are brought up by expectoration,
and which we can examine better than others, because they are mixed
with no foreign substance; observe how they differ, in the different
affections of the chest; sometimes they have a yellowish and as it were
bilious tinge; sometimes they are frothy in the vessel which receives
them; sometimes they adhere to it with tenacity, and at others they
are easily detached from it. Viscid or liquid, fetid or without odour,
grey, white, green or even black in the morning, they have a thousand
external appearances which evidently denote differences in their
composition, differences which chemists have not yet explained to us. I
do not speak of the cases where as in phthisis, hemoptysis, &c. foreign
substances are mixed with these mucous juices. Now it is evident that
all these varieties depend only upon the varieties of the organic
sensibility of the bronchial glands or of the membrane upon which they
pour out their fluids. According as the property is differently altered
in the mucous system, it is in relation with different substances,
admits some and rejects others. The same organ, the same vessels can
there, according to the state of the forces that animate them, separate
from the mass of blood many different substances, rejecting one to-day
and admitting it to-morrow, &c.

Do you wish for other proofs of the innumerable varieties which the
different modifications of the organic sensibility of the mucous
membranes produce in their functions? Observe the urethra; in the
ordinary state it lets the urine pass freely; in the excitement in
which its forces are in erection, its sensibility repels it and admits
only the semen. Who does not know that in one species of epiphora,
the mucous passages for the tears are open, and that the diminution
only of their vital forces prevents this fluid from flowing in them?
The sensibility of the mucous surfaces is oftentimes so altered that
their glands refuse to admit every kind of fluid; this happens in the
beginning of some peripneumonies, in which expectoration is entirely
suppressed, it is always a serious beginning, and even an indication
of death, if the state of the sensibility does not change, unless a
relaxation, as it is commonly called, takes place.

In general, I think that there are but few systems which deserve, more
than this of which we are treating, to fix the attention of physicians,
on account of the innumerable alterations of which it is susceptible,
alterations which almost always suppose those of the predominant
vital properties of this system, as the alterations of the muscular,
nervous systems, &c. most often put in action the properties which more
particularly belong to them, viz. animal contractility for one, and the
sensibility of the same species for the other.

The sensible organic contractility does not appear to be the attribute
of the mucous system; yet there is often in it something more than the
insensible oscillations which compose the other organic contractility.
For example, in the emission of semen, in which there is no agent of
impulse at the extremity of the urethra, as in the evacuation of urine,
it is very probable that this is spasmodically contracted to produce
the jet, oftentimes very strong, which then takes place. The following
phenomenon which I have observed in myself appears to belong to the
same cause. In gaping, there sometimes escapes from the mouth then wide
open, a small jet of fluid, which coming from the lateral parts of this
cavity that it passes over, is thrown at some distance; if a surface
is then before the mouth, as when we read a book, this fluid is spread
in small drops upon this surface; it is the saliva which the excretory
duct of Steno throws out with force. Now on the one hand this duct is
almost wholly mucous, and on the other it has not at its posterior
part a muscular agent of impulse. Perhaps the excretories which pour
out their fluids in the deep parts of the organs, exhibit the same
phenomenon. We know that the milk is also sometimes subject to a kind
of ejection, when it is very abundant, an ejection which supposes
a powerful contraction of the lactiferous ducts. In general, these
different motions analogous to that of the dartos, of the cellular
texture, &c. appear to hold a middle place between those of tone and
those of irritability.


_Sympathies._

There are few systems that sympathize more frequently with the others
than this. Now in its sympathies, it sometimes influences and sometimes
is influenced. The first Tissot calls the active mode of sympathy, the
second the passive. Let us make use of this classification.


_Active Sympathies._

One point of the mucous system being inflamed, irritated or stimulated
in any way, all the vital forces can enter separately into action in
the other systems.

Sometimes it is the animal contractility that is brought
sympathetically into action; thus the diaphragm, the intercostal and
abdominal muscles contract to produce sneezing from irritation of the
pituitary membrane, or cough from the irritation of the membrane of
the bronchia, or from that even of the surface of the stomach, which
produces stomachic coughs, which, as we know, have nothing to do with
affections of the chest. We know the general spasm that seizes all the
muscles the instant a foreign body passes between the mucous edges of
the epiglottis. Stones of the bladder and the urethra, by making the
cremaster contract sympathetically, produce retraction of the testicle.
Physicians might, I think, profit by the knowledge of these mucous
sympathies. In apoplexy, in which the bronchia is sometimes filled with
mucus that the patient cannot evacuate, the action of ammonia upon the
pituitary membrane produces the double effect, 1st, of stimulating the
brain as blisters do; 2d, of freeing, by the cough it occasions, the
surface of the bronchia, which being obstructed, is an obstacle to the
passage of the air.

Sometimes it is the animal sensibility that is put into action by an
affection of the mucous surfaces. The stone, that irritates that of the
bladder, causes an itching at the end of the glans penis. That of the
intestines being irritated by worms, an inconvenient itching is felt
at the end of the nose. Whytt has seen a foreign body introduced into
the ear, affect painfully the whole corresponding side of the head; an
ulcer of the bladder, produce every time the patient passed water, a
pain on the superior part of the thigh, &c. &c.

The sensible organic contractility is often sympathetically excited
by the affections of the mucous system. I might at first refer to
this subject what I have observed respecting the organic muscles,
almost all of which move from an excitement of a contiguous mucous
surface; but that is a natural phenomenon; there are many others that
are preternatural. A stone that irritates the internal surface of the
pelvis of the kidney produces vomiting, which is, as we know, produced
any time at will by an irritation of the uvula. The instant the semen
passes the urethra in coition, the action of the heart is commonly
accelerated. Tissot speaks of a stone which, being entangled in the
duct of Warton, produced a sympathetic discharge from the bowels. I
saw at the Hôtel Dieu two women, who, whenever they menstruated, and
the mucous surface of the womb was consequently in activity, could
retain the urine but a short time in the bladder, which contracted
involuntarily to expel it the moment it entered it. At ordinary times,
there was nothing peculiar in the evacuation of this fluid.

As to the sympathies of insensible contractility and of organic
sensibility, they take place when a mucous surface being irritated
towards the extremity of an excretory duct, the gland of this duct is
brought into action, when, for example, the saliva flows in greater
abundance by the action of sialagogues upon the extremity of the
Stenonian duct. Whenever there is a gastric derangement and the mucous
surface of the stomach consequently suffers, the surface of the tongue
is sympathetically affected; the glands situated under this surface
increase their action and hence that white mucous coat, that is
commonly called a foul tongue, which is a real sympathetic catarrh, but
which can however exist idiopathically. Here also is to be referred
the remarkable influence of the mucous system upon the cutaneous; thus
during digestion, in which the mucous juices pour out abundantly from
all sides into the stomach and the intestines, and in which the mucous
membranes of the gastric viscera are consequently in great action, the
fluid of insensible transpiration is lessened remarkably, according to
the observation of Sanctorius; it is in very small quantity three hours
after the meal, so that the action of the cutaneous organ is evidently
less energetic. Thus during sleep, in which all the internal functions
become more evident and are exerted to their utmost, and in which the
sensibility of the mucous membranes is consequently strongly developed,
the skin seems to be struck with a species of atony; it becomes cold
more easily, it allows less substances to escape from it, &c. To
these sympathies also can be referred many phenomena of hemorrhages.
We know with what facility the mucous surface ceasing, from any
accidental cause, to throw out blood, as happens so often on that of
the womb, another is immediately affected and discharges this fluid;
hence hemorrhages from the nose, the stomach, the chest, &c. from the
suppression of those of the uterus, &c.


_Passive Sympathies._

In many cases, the other systems being irritated, the animal
sensibility of this is brought into action. Among the numerous examples
of this fact, the following is a remarkable one. In many diseases in
which organs foreign to the mucous system are affected, we experience
a sensation of burning heat in the mouth, the stomach, the intestines,
&c. and yet the mucous surface, the seat of this sensation, does not
disengage more caloric than usual; we may be convinced of this by
placing the fingers in the mouth. This sensation is of the same nature
as that which we refer to the glans penis when there is a stone in
the bladder, as that which is experienced at the end of the nose from
worms in the intestines, &c. There is no material cause of pain, and
yet there is suffering. Thus in intermittent fevers we experience a
cutaneous shivering, though the skin may be as warm as usual; I would
observe in respect to this, that the mucous membranes are hardly ever
the seat of an analogous sensation of sympathetic cold, but it is
almost always a sensation of heat that the aberrations of the vital
forces produce in them. Whence arises this difference between them and
the cutaneous organs? I know not. I attribute also to a sympathy of
animal sensibility the great thirst which takes place in all the severe
affections of any part. In all great wounds, after severe operations,
in experiments on living animals, &c. we observe this thirst which
depends upon a sympathetic affection of the whole mucous surface that
extends into the mouth, the stomach and the œsophagus.

Animal contractility cannot be put sympathetically into action in the
mucous system, since it does not exist in it.

The same is true of the sensible organic contractility. It is possible
that sometimes the kind of motion we have noticed, and which resembles
this property, may be sympathetically excited; I know no example of it.

The insensible organic contractility is here very frequently in
sympathetic activity. It is the skin especially which exercises by
means of this property, a great influence upon the mucous system. 1st.
In hemorrhages of the mucous surface of the womb, the nostrils, &c.
a cold body applied to the skin in the neighbourhood, contracts this
surface and stops the blood. 2d. Who does not know that the production
of most catarrhs is often the sudden consequence of the action of
cold on the cutaneous organ? 3d. In various affections of the mucous
membranes, baths which relax and expand the skin, frequently produce
happy effects. 4th. When the temperature of the atmosphere benumbs
the cutaneous tone, that of the mucous system receives a remarkable
increase of energy. Hence why in winter and in cold climates, in
which the functions of the skin are very much diminished, all those of
this system increase in proportion. Hence the more evident pulmonary
exhalation, the more abundant internal secretions, a more active
digestion, more quickly performed and consequently an appetite more
easily excited. 5th. When on the contrary the heat of the climate
and the season relax and expand the cutaneous surface, the mucous
surface is in proportion contracted; in summer, at noon, &c. there
is a diminution of the secretions, of that of the urine especially,
a slowness in the digestive phenomena from a defect in the action of
the stomach and intestines, an appetite slow to return, &c. 6th. In
various general affections of the skin, certain portions of the mucous
membranes are almost always affected. In scarlet fever, the throat
most usually suffers sympathetically. This phenomenon is very common
in small pox. 7th. In the latter periods of organic affections of the
viscera, as in phthisis, diseases of the heart, enlargements of the
liver, cancers of the womb, &c. the mucous membranes are affected like
the serous surfaces. The kind of atony in which they then are, produces
a more copious flow of mucous juices in them which are altered, become
more fluid, &c.; hence the diarrhœas that are called colliquative,
which are then to the mucous surfaces, what dropsies are to the serous
ones; 8th. It is also to this atony that must be attributed the
pectoral hemorrhages which so frequently take place in the last periods
of organic diseases, in those of the heart especially. During the short
time that I have been at the Hôtel Dieu, there has already died more
than twenty patients whom I have opened, of these affections almost
forgotten by all practitioners before the time of Corvisart; I have
only observed four examples in which passive hemorrhage of the lungs
was not the precursor of death.


_Character of the Vital Properties._

From what we have thus far said, it is evident that the mucous system
is one of those of the whole economy, in which life is the most active.
Always in contact with substances that stimulate and irritate it, it is
as it were like the skin, in continual action. Yet the life is not the
same in all its parts; it undergoes in each remarkable modifications,
which no doubt depend on those we have pointed out in the organization
of this system, in the nature of its corion, in the arrangement of its
papillæ, in the distribution of its vessels and its nerves, in that of
its glands, &c.; for as we have seen, none of these essential bases of
the mucous system is everywhere arranged in the same manner. There is
an organization common to the system, and one peculiar to each of its
divisions. It is the same in regard to its life; there is a life common
to the system, and as many peculiar ones as there are parts to which it
is extended. We know how much the animal sensibility of the pituitary
membrane differs from that of the palatine, how powerfully the membrane
of the glans penis and the urethra is stimulated by the passage of the
semen which makes no impression upon any other mucous surface. The same
is true in regard to the organic sensibility and the contractility of
the same species. Each mucous surface, in relation with the fluid it is
accustomed to, would bear the others with difficulty. The urine would
be a stimulant for the stomach and the gastric juice for the bladder;
the bile that remains in the gall-bladder would produce a catarrh upon
the membrane of the nose, in the vesiculæ seminales, &c.

From these varieties in the vital forces of each division of the
mucous system, it is not astonishing that the diseases of this system
should also be very variable. Each has a general character, but this
is modified in each mucous surface. There is an order of symptoms
common to all catarrhs; but each has its peculiar signs, each has
its different products. The fluid from a pulmonary catarrh does not
resemble that from a nasal one; that coming from a urethral, vesical
catarrh, &c. is wholly different from that from an intestinal one.
These fluids exhibit in their morbid changes the same differences that
we have pointed out in their natural composition, differences which are
derived like them, from the different vitality of each portion of the
mucous system.

It is to these varieties of life and the vital forces that must be
referred also those of the sympathies. Each portion of this system has
a peculiar sympathetic action upon the other organs. The pituitary
alone being irritated produces sneezing. You would excite in vain the
extremity of the glans penis, the rectum, &c. you would never produce
vomiting as you do by stimulating the uvula.

An important remark should here be made in regard to the stomach. We
know that there is no organ which performs a more important part in the
sympathies than this. The least affection of this important viscus,
the least gastric derangement, spread over the whole animal economy a
painful influence; all the other parts feel it. I do not believe even
that there is any uneasiness more fatiguing and general than that which
we then experience in certain cases. The general weakness which takes
place in hunger almost instantaneously, is sympathetic; the alteration
of nutrition has not had time to produce it. The same is true with
regard to the sudden increase of the forces which results from the
contact of the aliments upon the mucous surface of this viscus, an
increase which cannot be attributed to the passage of the chyle into
the blood, which has not yet had time to take place.

I think the stomach owes this important part in the sympathies
principally to its mucous surface. In fact, 1st, its serous surface has
no connexion with it, since it is there of the same nature as in all
the rest of the peritoneum, besides in what is called inflammation of
the abdomen, and in which this serous surface is especially affected,
we do not observe such numerous sympathetic relations. 2d. The fleshy
coat appears to be the same as that of the whole intestinal canal;
why then should it have different influences? 3d. As it respects
blood-vessels and nerves of the ganglions, the stomach is nearly
organized like the rest of the alimentary tube. 4th. It has besides the
par vagum; but is this nerve alone capable of producing such numerous
phenomena? It can contribute to them; but certainly the peculiar
modifications which it experiences in the mucous surface, the peculiar
nature of this membrane contribute also much to it. No membrane is
organized like that of the stomach. Though we do not see perfectly
at first view its organic differences, reflection is sufficient to
convince us of them; thus on the one hand no one separates so great
a quantity of fluid, and on the other none furnishes one of a nature
analogous to that of the gastric juice.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


I. _State of the Mucous System in the First Age._

The development of the mucous system follows in general the laws of
that of the organs to which it belongs. Early in the gastric apparatus,
later in the pulmonary and that of generation, it seems in its growth
rather to obey the impulse it receives, than to give one to what
surrounds it, an arrangement common to almost all the systems which
contribute to form the different apparatus. Observe in fact that there
is always in the growth certain parts to which all the others refer;
thus in the cerebral apparatus, the early size of the brain produces
that of the bones of the cranium, of the dura-mater, the pia-mater,
the arachnoides and the vessels; thus it is on account of the spinal
marrow, that the vertebral canal is so evident in the fœtus; thus
all the serous surfaces have a growth in proportion to that of their
respective organs, &c. &c. I would remark however that the early growth
of the systems which are only to follow that of the parts to which they
are destined, is only in the dimensions of length, breadth, &c. The
thickness most commonly does not correspond with these dimensions. Thus
the bones of the cranium though broader in proportion than those of the
pelvis in the fœtus, are not thicker. The extent of the dura-mater is
in proportion greater than that of the albuginea which belongs to the
same system; but the organization is no further advanced.

In the fœtus, the delicacy of the mucous texture is extreme, the
papillæ are hardly perceptible. But by carrying the hand over a mucous
surface, we feel there an extremely delicate velvet and such as is not
equalled by the finest velvet. The redness of this system is not then
as evident, because no doubt less blood penetrates it, as the various
functions which are afterwards to take place upon these surfaces, as
digestion, the excretions, respiration, &c. are but feeble or entirely
wanting. At this age, the quantity of blood seems to be in an inverse
ratio in the skin and in these surfaces. The mucous red is then like
the muscular, of a very deep tinge, often even livid, on account of the
nature of the blood circulating in the arteries. Then the adhesions
of the mucous texture to the subjacent cellular are less; those
especially of this last with the surrounding parts are very slight;
thus it is very easy to draw out whole the internal portion of the
intestines of the fœtus, from the external covering that contains it,
so as to see two cylindrical canals, one of which is muscular and
serous, the other cellular and mucous. The stretching destroys in
this experiment all the valvulæ conniventes, and the small intestines
are as smooth on the interior as the large, in the canal artificially
extracted. If we subject this canal to ebullition, much more scum
arises from it than in the adult; this scum is white and never green.
The crisping that takes place a little before the first boiling,
diminishes more in proportion the length of the canal, and consequently
appears to be stronger.

At birth, when respiration and digestion suddenly commence, the
secretions increase, the mucous system acquires a remarkable degree of
activity. It is instantly excited powerfully by the many new substances
with which it is in contact. It is by it and by the cutaneous system
that bodies foreign to ours then immediately stimulate it, and so
much the more efficaciously, as the double surface which receives the
excitement is not accustomed to it. Then the red blood which penetrates
the mucous system, gives it an increase of energy and sensibility,
which renders it still more proper to receive impressions. Thus the
mucous juices which till then stagnated upon their respective surfaces,
without fatiguing and irritating them, are suddenly for them, on
account of their increase of sensibility, stimulants which excite them,
and force the subjacent muscles to contract. Then the urine becomes for
the bladder a cause that promotes the contraction of it. A few instants
after birth, all the openings in which the mucous membranes begin, open
and permit to escape the meconium, the urine and all the mucous juices.
This internal and general shock that empties all the mucous cavities,
renders them fit to become the seat of the great functions which are
soon to take place in them.

When all the internal functions are in activity, the mucous surfaces
experience no more sudden changes, analogous to that of which I have
spoken. They grow like the other viscera in a slow and insensible
manner; they preserve for a long time their original softness, which is
remarkable, especially in the nose, the stomach, &c. and which during
lactation, is not adapted in the infant, to the solid substances with
which the adult is nourished. Is this softness the cause of the mucous
affections which are in general so common at that age? We know that
then the mucous juices abound; the pituitary membrane is more moist;
the stomach and intestines are frequently affected with a species of
catarrh which is the cause of the looseness that we have so often to
combat in infancy. The membrane of the bronchia is also frequently
diseased. The two extreme ages of life resemble each other by the
abundance of the mucous juices secreted upon their respective mucous
surfaces.

In youth the mucous system is in very powerful action. The active
hemorrhages of this system are very frequent at this age; those of
the nose, the bronchia and even the stomach often take place; those
of the portions of this system, subjacent to the diaphragm, are then
less common. Observe that in man, hemorrhages of the gastro-pulmonary
surface are infinitely more frequent than those of the genito-urinary
surface, which on the contrary, are much more numerous in woman in whom
one of them is natural to a part of this surface, viz. menstruation.

At the period of puberty, the development of the genital parts in both
sexes, gives much activity to a part of the genito-urinary surface;
then menstruation begins upon that of the womb; then the sensibility
of the urethra is raised in order to feel acutely the passage of the
semen. Observe that this increase of energy is not attended with a
weakness of the other parts, as happens in many cases; on the contrary,
all the systems, all the apparatus seem to borrow, from the force which
the genital parts acquire, an increase of action.


II. _State of the Mucous System in the subsequent Ages._

In the years which succeed youth, the mucous system continues to grow,
thicken and become firmer. Its vital energy seems still to predominate
for some time, in the superior surfaces, as in the pituitary, the
membrane of the bronchia, &c.; thus the affections of these parts are
more frequent until the thirtieth year. But as we advance in age, the
abdominal mucous surfaces appear to predominate over the others, as in
general all the organs of this region do.

Besides, a thousand causes in the course of life, make the state of
the mucous system vary. We do not find it in two subjects, with the
same shade of colour, with the same density, with the same external
appearance. By taking any surface upon many subjects, that of the
stomach, for example, we easily see these differences, with which we
must be struck if we have opened dead bodies but ever so little.

The redness of the mucous texture is very bright until the thirtieth
year; after that, it begins to alter. This texture becomes more and
more pale in old age; the blood enters it but in small quantity; it
acquires more consistence and density. The fingers carried over it
no longer perceive that softness, that velvet so remarkable in the
first age. Its forces, which grow languid, render difficult, in the
excretories, the exit of the fluids which pass through these tubes to
be thrown out. Yet the mucous glands still secrete their fluids in very
great abundance. Often even these fluids increase in proportion which
constitutes the catarrhal affections, so common in old age. But these
affections then have the same character as the functions of the whole
system; secretion takes place slowly; the disease is always chronic;
most often it terminates only with life.

The mucous absorption is, at this age, slow and difficult, like all the
others; the various contagions are taken much less easily, either by
the respiratory surfaces, or by the contact of contagious miasmata upon
the neighbouring surfaces of the skin. The chyle slowly absorbed, makes
the digestive periods longer.




SEROUS SYSTEM.


This system, the name of which I borrow, like that of the preceding,
from the fluid that constantly lubricates one of its surfaces, is
always like it arranged in the form of membranes, and never in
fasciculi like the muscular system, or in round bodies like the
glandular. It is formed by the peritoneum, the pleura, the pericardium,
the arachnoides, the tunica vaginalis, &c. The term serous membrane
will then be very often used to designate it. No one, I believe, before
the publication of my Treatise on the Membranes, had considered in a
general manner these organs, which perform a less important part in
the functions than the mucous, but which in diseases are almost as
frequently affected. Pinel, who has perceived the analogy of their
inflammations, has taken this system as a character of one of the
classes of his phlegmasiæ.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE EXTENT, FORMS, AND FLUIDS OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.

The serous system occupies the exterior of most of the organs of which
the mucous lines the interior; such are the stomach, the intestines,
the bladder, the lungs, &c. We see it around all those that are
essential to life, as around the brain, the heart, all the gastric
viscera, the testicles, the bladder, &c. It does not form, like the
mucous system, a surface everywhere continuous upon the numerous
organs on which it is spread. But it is always found insulated in its
different divisions which never have any communication. The number of
these divisions is somewhat considerable. By considering in one view
all the different serous surfaces, we see that as a whole they exceed
the mucous surfaces viewed also in a general manner. One consideration
is sufficient to convince us of it. The mucous and serous surfaces
accompany each other in a very great number of parts, as in the
stomach, the intestines, the lungs, the bladder, the gall-bladder, &c.
so as to exhibit in them nearly the same extent. But on the one hand,
the mucous surfaces extend where the serous are not met with, as in the
nasal fossæ, the œsophagus, the mouth, &c. &c.; and on the other, there
is a very great number of serous surfaces existing separately from the
mucous, as the pericardium, the arachnoides, &c. Now if we compare
the extent of the separate serous surfaces, with that of the separate
mucous surfaces, we shall see that the first is much greater than the
other.

These considerations, apparently minute, deserve however particular
attention, on account of the relation of functions existing between
these two surfaces taken as a whole, a relation which is especially
connected with the exhalation of the albuminous fluids produced by one,
and with the secretion of the mucous fluids, of which the other is
the seat. Besides, in examining the extent of each serous membrane in
particular, we see great varieties from the peritoneum which has the
greatest surface, to the tunica vaginalis which has the least.

The serous surface taken as a whole, compared with the cutaneous
surface, is also evidently superior to it in extent; so that in this
respect, the quantity of albuminous fluids constantly exhaled within,
appears to be much more considerable than that of the fluid which is
incessantly thrown off by insensible transpiration; I say in this
respect, for different circumstances, by increasing the action of the
cutaneous organ, can re-establish the equilibrium in the exhalation
of these two fluids, one of which re-enters by absorption into the
circulation, and the other is wholly excrementitious. I do not know
even if the pulmonary and cutaneous exhalations united are not less
than those which take place upon the serous surfaces.

Every serous membrane represents a sac without an opening, spread upon
the respective organs that it embraces, and which are sometimes very
numerous, as in the case of the peritoneum, sometimes single, as in the
case of the pericardium, covering these organs so that they are not
contained in its cavity, and so that if it was possible to dissect them
from their surface, we should have this cavity whole. This sac has in
this respect the same arrangement as those night caps, which are folded
within themselves; a trifling comparison, but which gives an accurate
idea of this sort of membranes.

From this general arrangement, it is easy to understand that the
serous membranes are never opened to permit the vessels and nerves to
penetrate the respective organs to which they go or from which they
come off, but that they always wind round them and accompany them
to the organ, and thus form for them a sheath which prevents them
from being contained in their cavities; this removes the danger of
infiltration of serum which lubricates them, an infiltration which
would take place through the neighbouring cellular texture, especially
if they were dropsical; if, as in the fibrous membranes, they were
pierced with foramina for the passage of these vessels and nerves.
This arrangement, exclusively remarkable in the membranes of which we
are treating, and in the synovial ones, is evident at the entrance
of the vessels of the lungs, the spleen, the intestines, the stomach,
the testicles, &c. We see it very well in the arachnoides, a membrane
essentially serous, as I have demonstrated elsewhere.

From the general idea that we have given of these membranes, it is
also easy to understand how almost all are composed of two distinct
parts, though continuous, and embracing, the one the internal surface
of the cavity where they are found, the other the organs of this
cavity; thus there is a costal and pulmonary pleura, a cranial and
cerebral arachnoides, one portion of peritoneum spread upon the gastric
organs, and another upon the abdominal parietes, a free portion of the
pericardium, and one adhering to the heart. The same arrangement exists
in the testicles, &c.

Though the serous membranes may be separate, yet there sometimes
exists communications between them; that for example of the cavity of
the omentum with that of the peritoneum, that of the cavity of the
arachnoides with the cavity of the membrane which lines the ventricles
by the canal that I have discovered, and the external orifice of which
is seen below and at the posterior part of the corpus callosum; whilst
the internal one is seen above the pineal gland, between the two rows
of small round bodies which are usually found in this place.

There is but one example of continuity between the serous and mucous
membranes, that which exists, by means of the Fallopian tube, between
the peritoneum and the uterine surface. How does the respective nature
of the two membranes change here?


_Free Surface of the Serous Membranes._

Every serous membrane has one of its two surfaces free, everywhere
contiguous to itself, and the other adhering to the neighbouring
organs. The first is remarkable for its polish, which especially
distinguishes this system and the following, from all the other
membranes. All the organs which exhibit this arrangement owe it to the
covering they borrow from it. The liver ceases to be smooth and shining
at its diaphragmatic edge where the peritoneum abandons it. There is
in this respect a great difference in the appearance of the anterior
and posterior face of the cæcum. The bladder is rough wherever the
peritoneal covering is wanting. The cartilages of the ribs have not the
polish of those of the articulations which the synovial membrane covers.

Does this remarkable attribute of the serous membranes depend on the
compression exerted upon them? Their situation in places where they
are exposed to continual friction, would seem to make it probable.
Bordeu thought so, when he said that all the parts of the abdomen
are originally covered with cellular texture, which by pressure is
afterwards changed into membranes; so that the peritoneum is formed
partially upon each gastric organ, and its different parts give birth,
by uniting, to the general membrane. This explanation of the formation
of the peritoneum is applicable, according to him, to the pleura,
the pericardium, and all the analogous membranes. But if this is the
progress of nature, 1st, why, whatever be the period at which we
examine the fœtus, do we find the peritoneum and the serous membranes
as much developed in proportion, as their corresponding organs? 2d.
How are the numerous folds of these membranes formed, such as the
mesentery, the omentum, &c.? 3d. Why are there parts where they do not
exist though they are exposed to as great friction as that of the parts
where they are found? Why, for example, are the sides of the bladder
destitute of it, whilst it covers its superior part? 4th. Why does it
not also form serous surfaces around the great vessels of the arm, the
thigh, &c. which impart to the neighbouring organs an evident motion?
5th. Why does not the thickness of the serous membranes increase
where the motion is strongest and diminish where it is weakest? Why
for example does the thickness of the tunica vaginalis equal that of
the pericardium? 6th. How can friction internally produce an organized
body, whilst externally it constantly disorganizes the epidermis? 7th.
How can we associate the vascular lymphatic texture of the serous
membranes with the pressure that produces them? The impossibility of
resolving these numerous questions proves, that it is not to mechanical
pressure that must be attributed the formation of the serous membranes
and the polish of their surface; that their mode of origin is the same
as that of the other organs; that they commence and are developed with
them; that this polish is an evident result of their organization, as
the mucous papillæ depend upon the texture of the surfaces to which
they belong. What would be said of a system in which these papillæ
should be attributed to the pressure of the aliments upon the stomach,
of the urine on the bladder, the air on the pituitary membrane, &c.?

The free surface of the serous membranes separates entirely from the
neighbouring organs those upon which these membranes are spread; so
that they are to these organs real boundaries, barriers, if I may use
the term, or integuments, if it should be preferred, very different
however from those which are external. Observe in fact that all the
principal viscera, the heart, the lungs, the brain, the gastric
viscera, the testicles, &c. limited by their serous covering, suspended
in the middle of the sac that it forms, only communicate with the
adjacent parts where their vessels enter; everywhere else there is
contiguity and not continuity.

This insulation of position coincides very well with the insulation of
vitality which is remarked in all the organs, and especially in those
that we have just noticed. Each has its peculiar life, which is the
result of a particular modification of its vital forces, a modification
which necessarily establishes one in the circulation, nutrition and
temperature. No part feels, is moved and nourished like another, unless
it belongs to the same system. Each organ executes on a small scale the
phenomena which take place on a large one in the economy; each takes
from the circulation the aliment that is proper for it, digests it,
throws back into the mass of blood, the portion which is heterogeneous
to it, and appropriates to itself that which can nourish it; it is
digestion in miniature. No doubt the ancients wished to give an idea of
this truth which has been so well explained by Bordeu, when they said
that the womb was a living animal within another. A very important use
then of the serous membranes is to contribute, by rendering independent
the position of their respective organs, to the independence of the
vital forces, life and functions of these organs.

Let us not forget to consider under the same point of view, the moist
atmosphere with which they are constantly surrounded, an atmosphere
analogous to that which the cellular texture forms for various other
organs. In this atmosphere all the morbific emanations of the organ go
and are lost, if we may so say, without these emanations injuring the
other organs. We have seen that this atmosphere in the cellular system
is sometimes the seat of phenomena wholly different, and serves to
transmit diseases from one organ to another. Now the serous membranes
are a barrier much less easily surmounted, because they have not
filaments which go from one organ to another, there is only contiguity
as I have said, with the organs that they surround. We very rarely see
in the abdomen a disease of the liver communicated to the intestines,
one of the spleen passing to the stomach, &c.

The smoothness of the free surface of the serous system greatly
facilitates the motions of the organs which it covers. We have already
observed that nature employs two principal means for this object, viz.
the membranes and the cellular texture. By distributing externally
the second of these means, it has designed the first especially for
internal motions. The smoothness and moisture of the serous surfaces
are singularly favourable for them. These internal motions are usually
regarded only in an insulated manner, as relating to the functions of
the organ that executes them, as in relation to the circulation for
the heart, respiration for the lungs, digestion for the stomach, &c.
But they should also be considered in a general manner; they should be
regarded as carrying through the whole machine a continual excitement
which supports and animates the forces and the action of all the organs
of the head, the chest and the abdomen, which receive less sensibly
than the organs of the extremities, the influence of external motions.
It is these internal motions that excite, sustain, and develop within,
the nutritive phenomena, as the motions of the thigh, the arm, &c.
without, favour the nutrition of the muscles which are found there;
this is seen very evidently in bakers and other mechanics who exert
more particularly this or that part. It is thus that the serous
membranes contribute indirectly to the nutrition and growth of their
respective viscera; but they never have a direct influence upon this
nutrition, because their organization and life are different from the
life and organization of these viscera.

The free surface of the serous system differs essentially from that of
the mucous, in this, that it contracts frequent adhesions. The pleura
is of all the serous organs, that in which these adhesions are the most
evident. We find almost as many dead bodies in which they exist, as we
do those in which they do not. Next to the pleura is the peritoneum,
then the pericardium, then the tunica vaginalis, then the arachnoides,
which is that of all the serous surfaces in which adhesions are the
least frequent, though I have observed them in it. These adhesions
exhibit many varieties which can be studied best on the pleura, which
are as follows.

1st. Sometimes the costal and pulmonary portion are so identified at
many points or in every part, that they make but a single membrane, and
are united as closely as the two edges of the lip in a hare-lip that
has been operated upon with success. 2d. At other times the adhesion
is so slight, that the least effort is sufficient to destroy it. I
have many times noticed this fact in the pericardium. I saw it once in
the tunica vaginalis of a man who had been operated upon for hydrocele
by means of injection, at the time I was surgeon for operations at
the Hôtel Dieu. Separated then from each other, the two surfaces were
uneven; they lost their polish. 3d. Frequently between the costal
and pulmonary portion of the pleura, between the surfaces of the
peritoneum, &c. there are several elongations of various lengths, which
form a kind of loose bridles, traversing the serous cavity, having the
same organization and polish as the membrane of which they appear a
kind of fold, containing in their interior a species of small canal,
because they are formed by two layers united together, resembling
very much the elongation of the synovial membrane of the knee, which
goes from the posterior part of the patella to the space between the
condyles of the femur, having also an appearance analogous to the
different natural folds of the peritoneum. We can hardly conceive that
these filaments so regularly organized can result from inflammation. I
am inclined to believe that they are owing to an original conformation.
4th. Frequently between the two portions of the pleura, there are seen
many other elongations wholly different, which are not smooth, and do
not form canals, but which appear to be flocculent and really analogous
to the cellular layers; so that where they exist it may be said, that
the membrane is entirely changed into this texture, which is besides,
as we shall see, the essential base of its organization. 5th. I do
not speak of the adhesions produced by false membranes, by albuminous
flakes, intermediate to the two portions of a serous surface, &c. These
adhesions are to a certain point foreign to these surfaces.


II. _Adherent Surface of the Serous System._

The external surface of the serous membranes adheres almost everywhere
to the neighbouring organs; it is rare in fact to see these membranes
detached on both sides. The arachnoides at the basis of the cranium,
and some other examples are exceptions. This adhesion of the serous
membranes to their respective organs, is wholly different from that
of the fibrous membranes. In this last, the passage of the vessels so
unites the two parts, that their organization, seems to be common,
and when one is removed, the other almost always dies, as is seen in
the periosteum in relation to the bones, &c. On the contrary, every
serous membrane is almost foreign to the organ it surrounds; their
organization is different. The following are proofs of it;

1st. We very often see these membranes abandon and cover again
successively their respective organs; thus the broad ligaments, at a
great distance from the womb in the ordinary state, are to it like a
serous membrane during pregnancy. An intestine when distended borrows
from the mesentery a covering that quits it when it contracts. The
omentum is by turns, as Chaussier has well observed, a loose membrane
in the abdomen and a covering of the stomach. The peritoneal envelope
of the bladder often leaves it almost entirely. Has not the hernial sac
of those enormous tumours of gastric viscera originally served to line
the parietes of the abdomen? Now it is evident, since the different
organs can exist separate from their serous membranes, that there is
no connexion between their organization. 2d. It is always a loose
texture, easily stretched in every direction, that serves as a means of
union, and never a sanguineous vascular system, as in most of the other
adhesions. 3d. The affection of an organ is not a necessary consequence
of that of its serous membrane, and reciprocally the organ is often
affected and the membrane does not become diseased. For example, in the
operation for hydrocele, the testicle remains almost always sound in
the midst of the inflammation of its tunica vaginalis. The inflammation
of the mucous membrane of the intestines is not a consequence of that
of their peritoneal covering; and reciprocally in the various acute
catarrhal affections of the organs with a mucous membrane within and
a serous one without, this last is never found inflamed. In a word,
the affections of the mucous membranes are everywhere very distinct
from those of the serous, though most commonly both contribute to the
formation of the same organ. It is evident that a line of demarcation
so great in the affections supposes one of course in the organization.
The life of the serous membranes then is entirely distinct from that of
their corresponding organs.

Yet there are cases where these membranes do not present this loose
adhesion, and where they become so united to the organs which they
line, that frequently the most delicate scalpel cannot separate them.
Observe the tunica vaginalis on the albuginea, the arachnoides on the
dura-mater, and other membranes which form what I have called the
sero-fibrous, &c.; such is the connexion of these different surfaces,
that many have been mistaken to the present time for a single membrane.
There is however no more identity in the organization, than where the
serous membranes are more loosely attached to their respective organs,
as is seen in the peritoneum, the pleura, &c. Diseases sometimes
make this difference very evident. I have seen the arachnoides in a
subject that had been affected with a chronic inflammation, evidently
thickened on the internal surface of the dura-mater, without this
having experienced the slightest alteration; it was detached without
difficulty and torn with great ease.


III. _Serous Fluids._

Every serous membrane is moistened on its internal surface by a fluid
almost the same as the serum of the blood. The exhaling orifices
constantly pour it out and it is constantly taken up by the absorbents.
Its quantity varies. A mere dew in the natural state, it is exhaled
in vapour when the serous surfaces are laid bare and allow the air to
dissolve it. It is in general more abundant in dead bodies than in
the living, because on the one hand the transudation which the tonic
forces prevent, then easily takes place from the destruction of these
forces, and supplies the place of the vital exhalation, by transmitting
mechanically by their weight, the fluids of the surrounding organs to
the different serous cavities, and because on the other hand, this
destruction of the tonic forces prevents every kind of absorption;
hence the stagnation and accumulation of this fluid. We know to what an
extent this increases in various dropsies, especially in that of the
abdomen.

Does this quantity vary according to the different states of the
organs which the serous membranes cover? It has been long said, that
the synovia is exhaled in greater abundance in the motion of the
articulations, than in their state of rest. I have no data on this
point founded upon experiment; but I am certain that I have many times
observed in living animals, that the exhalation of the serous surface
of the abdomen does not increase during digestion, or at least if it is
greater, absorption becomes more active, and thus the surface of the
peritoneum is not more moist than at another time. I have opened the
thorax of many small guinea-pigs, after having first made them run
a long time in the chamber in order to accelerate their respiration,
and I have not observed greater moisture on the pleura. Yet it cannot
be doubted, as we shall see, that the quantity of the serous fluids
may be very variable in the different acute diseases; that the serous
membranes exhale more or less of them, according to the manner in which
they are sympathetically affected.

In the first periods of inflammations, in which the exhalants of the
serous membranes are full of blood which is preternaturally introduced
into them, the serum does not ooze in greater quantity from their
free surface. Then as they are on the one hand very sensible, and
very dry on the other, the motions of the organs that they cover are
wonderfully painful. It is in these first periods that adhesions take
place. If they are not formed either on account of the motion, or for
other reasons, and if resolution of the inflammation does not take
place, then happens to the serous surfaces what happens to a wound not
united; they suppurate, but this suppuration is never attended with
ulceration or erosion of their substance. However abundant the purulent
collections may be, these membranes always remain sound; their texture
is only more or less thickened; pus is thrown out by them, like the
natural serous fluids, that is by exhalation. We know how much this
fluid varies in consistence from milky serum, to the thickest false
membrane that adheres strongly to the surface that has exhaled the
materials of it.

The nature of the fluids of the serous system is very evidently
albuminous. The instant one of the membranes of this system is
plunged into boiling water, I have observed that it is covered with a
white layer which is concrete albumen, and which being removed some
time after, leaves the surface nearly of its original colour. All
the substances which coagulate albumen produce a similar layer upon
the serous surfaces. The experiments of Hewson, who has collected
some spoonsful of these fluids in the great animals, confirm their
albuminous nature. Rouelle and Fourcroy who have analyzed the water
of dropsies have also found albumen predominant in it. Observe upon
this subject that all the white flakes swimming in this water, that
the false membranes that form in it and the white fluids which give it
the appearance of milk, appear to be only albumen which is found in
different degrees of consistence. It might be said that the heat of
inflammation has produced the same phenomenon during life, that common
caloric does upon the white of an egg, the water of dropsies, &c. I
shall not treat of the other accessory principles that enter into the
composition of the serous fluids.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.

The first characters of the structure of these membranes are a white,
shining colour, less brilliant than that of the aponeuroses; a variable
thickness, very evident upon the liver, the heart, the intestines,
&c. hardly discoverable upon the arachnoides, the omentum, &c.; a
remarkable transparency whenever these membranes are raised for a
considerable extent, or are examined where they are detached on both
sides, as on the omentum.

All have but a single layer which it is possible, at the places where
it is thick, to raise from the cellular layers, but which can never
be neatly divided into two or three portions; a character essentially
distinct from those of the mucous membranes. The action of a blister
on their external surface first laid bare, for example, on a portion
of intestine drawn out in a living animal, does not make a pellicle
rise upon it, as upon the skin, a pellicle under which the serum is
collected. I have frequently made this attempt. What is the immediate
structure of this single layer of the serous membranes? I shall now
examine it.


I. _Cellular Nature of the Serous Texture._

Every system is in general, as we have thus far seen, an assemblage,
1st. of common parts, which are especially the cellular texture, the
blood vessels, the exhalants, the absorbents and the nerves, which
form as we have said the outline and the frame of it, if I may so
express myself; 2d. of a peculiar fibre formed by a substance which
is deposited in this outline, by gelatine, for example, for the
cartilages, by gelatine and phosphate of lime for the bones, by fibrin
for the muscles, &c. That which makes these organs resemble each other
then is the cellular organ, the vessels and the nerves; that which
distinguishes them, is their peculiar texture, which depends itself
upon a peculiar nutritive matter. A bone would become a muscle, if,
without changing its texture at all, nature had imparted to it the
faculty of secreting fibrin, and of encrusting itself with it, instead
of separating the phosphate of lime and being penetrated with it. But
the serous system does not appear to have in it a distinct nutritive
matter, and consequently a peculiar texture. It is only formed of the
mould, the outline of others, and is not penetrated by a substance
that characterizes it. Almost wholly cellular, it does not differ from
this system in its common form, except by a degree of condensation, by
an approximation and union of cells which are found scattered in the
ordinary state.

The following are the proofs that the texture of the serous system is
wholly cellular. 1st. There is an identity of nature where there is
an identity of functions and diseases; now it is evident that the uses
of these membranes and of the cellular texture, as it respects the
continual absorption and exhalation of lymph are completely the same,
and that the phenomena of the various dropsies are common to them,
with the difference only of the effusion in the one and infiltration
in the other. 2d. The inflation of air into the texture subjacent to
these membranes terminates by bringing them almost to a cellular state,
when it succeeds and is pushed for some time; an experiment which is
frequently very difficult. 3d. Maceration, as has been remarked by
Haller, produces at length the same effect, but in a still more evident
manner. 4th. The various cysts, hydatids, &c. whose appearance, texture
and nature even are entirely the same as in the serous membranes, as we
have seen, always arise in the midst of the cellular texture, grow at
its expense and are wholly formed of it. 5th. No fibre is found in the
serous membranes; a character that distinguishes it from all the other
organs and analogous to that of the cellular texture.

To these various proofs of analogy, of identity even of the cellular
and serous systems, we can add the action of different reagents, which
give results precisely similar in both. 1st. Every serous membrane
when dried, becomes transparent, does not turn yellow like the fibrous
and the mucous membranes, preserves a pliability foreign to these
membranes when dried, and gradually resumes its original state when it
is immersed in water. 2d. It becomes putrid much slower than the mucous
surfaces, the muscular layers, the glands, &c. This is remarkable in
the abdomen, upon the peritoneum which is frequently almost untouched,
when every thing is putrid around it, as may be seen by removing it;
for its transparency would make you believe at first view that it was
altered, if you examine it upon the fleshy and mucous surfaces. 3d.
Maceration at the ordinary temperature of cellars, reduces with great
difficulty to a pulp the serous membranes. The omentum, the finest
and most delicate of these membranes has resisted it for a very long
time in my experiments. This phenomenon is particularly striking when
compared with the maceration of tendons which are so resisting, and
which support such great efforts during life. These become pulpy in
water before the omentum is touched. The same phenomenon takes place
with regard to all the other serous surfaces. 4th. In boiling water,
these surfaces acquire the horny hardness like the fibrous system,
but furnish infinitely less gelatine; they do not become yellow like
it. The pleura in those portions of the thorax of animals that are
brought to our tables, has almost its ordinary appearance; only it
is less shining, has lost the faculty of crisping from the action of
caloric, is no longer affected in the same way by acids, &c. If it was
of a fibrous nature it would have disappeared in gelatine, on account
of its delicacy. I shall say the same of the external membrane of the
spleen, the liver and the lungs. Compare these membranes, that are
brought to our tables, when boiled with the intermuscular aponeuroses,
the tendons, &c. you will see that it is impossible to confound, as has
been done, all the white textures together, in regard to their nature.

If we compare the different effects of agents the most known upon the
serous system, with those that we have observed upon the cellular
system, we shall see that they are entirely the same; that these two
systems are consequently analogous, and even identical.

The serous system when it putrefies in the open air does not become
green like the skin, but is of a dull and very deep grey. During life,
on the contrary, its blackness is very evident in gangrene which is
sometimes the result of an acute inflammation, sometimes of those
chronic inflammations, attended with many small white tubercles, which
are so frequently found upon these membranes. This difference arises
from the circumstance, that in the dead body these surfaces are not
penetrated with blood at the time they become putrid; whereas they
contain much during life, when putrefaction succeeds inflammation which
has filled the exhalants with it. Many other facts prove, that the
greater the quantity of blood there is in a part when it putrefies, the
more livid and black it becomes. In the many dead bodies that I have
opened, I have never yet observed gangrene except in the peritoneum.
I have never seen it in the pleura, the arachnoides, the pericardium,
the tunica vaginalis; it no doubt takes place in them; but I think I
have opened dead bodies enough to allow my observation to establish as
a general principle; that the peritoneum is more subject to it than all
the other analogous organs.

Though the different considerations offered above establish much
analogy between the cellular and the serous systems, they exhibit
however real differences. First their external appearance is not
the same. Then there is something in their intimate nature that we
are unacquainted with, and which differs also; for whenever two
organs are identical in their nature, they are subject to the same
affections; now there is a disease of the serous surfaces that is not
seen in the cellular system; it is those slow inflammations of which
I spoke just now, a disease which should not be ranked in the class
of the phlegmasiæ, and which the production of the small tubercles
that attend it, especially characterizes. Authors who have not
sufficiently attended to it, have denominated it chronic enteritis in
the peritoneum, latent inflammation in the pleura, &c. though however
foreign to every subjacent organ, except in the latter periods when it
is propagated by the cellular texture, it has its seat exclusively in
the serous membranes, and is an affection peculiar to these membranes,
as miliary eruptions are to the cutaneous surfaces, as aphthæ to the
mucous surfaces, &c. Add to this difference that of the pus which the
cellular texture and the serous surfaces secrete; this fluid is not the
same in the two systems. The difference of its nature is not known; but
its external appearance is by no means the same.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Serous System. Exhalants._

A very evident exhalation is constantly going on upon the serous
surfaces. A particular order of vessels is the agent of this
exhalation, the matter of which is the fluid mentioned above. These
vessels are very distinctly demonstrated in this system; it is the
only one in which the eye of the anatomist can accurately trace them.
The following are the means of seeing them; 1st, in a living animal,
draw out an intestine from the abdomen; it will have a reddish tinge
owing to the vessels under the serous coat, and hardly at all to the
vessels in this coat itself. Irritate it, and reduce the intestine
after attaching a string to it, as in the operation of hernia where
there is gangrene, draw it out again at the end of six and thirty or
eight and forty hours; it will exhibit many reddish lines, running over
this serous surface, and showing in it plainly the exhalants which
were insensible in the natural state, on account of the transparency
of their fluids. 2d. Very fine injections cover in an instant all the
serous surfaces with an infinite number of lines of the colour of the
injected fluid, lines which are evidently exhalants full of this fluid.
3d. In these injections an extremely fine dew is made to ooze out upon
the smooth surface of the serous membranes, a dew which takes place
without rupture or transudation, and of which the exhalants are the
sources. 4th. If a serous surface is laid bare in a living animal, and
wiped dry, it is soon after covered with new serum, which the exhalants
furnish.


_Absorbents._

From the texture of the serous membranes, it is evident that the
lymphatic system enters essentially into their formation, and that
they are probably only a net-work of exhalants and absorbents; for we
have seen that the cellular organ is an assemblage of them. But this
assertion which analogy dictates is also supported by direct proofs.
1st. The fluid of the dropsies of the different cavities varies
in density and colour; now Mascagni has always observed that the
lymphatics in their neighbourhood contained a fluid exactly analogous.
2d. The same author has found in two dead bodies, with a sanguineous
effusion in the thorax, the absorbents of the lungs loaded with blood.
3d. In a man who had become emphysematous after having been poisoned,
these vessels were distended with air. 4th. Coloured fluids injected
into the abdomen or thorax are soon after found, it is said, in the
neighbouring lymphatics, with the same colour. I have often repeated
this experiment; the injected fluid has been soon absorbed, but not
the matter which coloured it; so that this matter, more condensed
after absorption, tinged the serous surface, the lymphatics being as
transparent as usual. It is necessary in general to choose the abdomen
for these experiments, because the absorbents being much exposed on
the liver, can be more easily examined there. This absorbent faculty
is preserved some time after death; but care should be taken, in
order to obtain then the effect more certainly, to keep the animal,
if a warm blooded one, in a bath of nearly its own temperature; I
have had frequent opportunities of being convinced of this truth, and
of observing with Cruickshank, that what Mascagni has said upon the
absorption of dead human bodies, fifteen, thirty, forty-eight hours
even after death, is at least very much exaggerated. 5th. The following
experiment I make every year to demonstrate the absorbents; I macerate
for five or six hours the heart of an ox in water; at the end of this
time, the serous membrane of this organ, which hardly allowed these
vessels to be perceived, appears to be covered with them. 6th. When the
serous membranes are inflamed, the subjacent lymphatics are distended,
like them, by the red globules of blood, &c. &c.

It appears then to be demonstrated, 1st, that the absorbents open by
an infinite number of orifices upon the serous membranes; 2d, that
their origins a thousand times intermixed with each other, and with the
orifices of the exhalants, contribute especially to form their texture;
3d, that the difficulty of distinguishing the absorbent and exhalant
pores is no reason for denying their existence, this difficulty arising
from their extreme delicacy and from the oblique direction in which
they open between the layers of these membranes; thus the obliquity
of the insertion of the duct of Warton, and of the ductus choledochus
even would render the inspection of them very difficult, though these
ducts were infinitely larger; 4th, that from this structure, the serous
membranes, always arranged as we have seen in the form of sacs without
an opening, should be regarded as great reservoirs between the exhalant
and absorbent systems, in which the lymph in going from one remains
some time before entering the other, in which it undoubtedly undergoes
various preparations of which we shall always be ignorant, because it
would be necessary to analyze it comparatively in these two orders
of vessels, which is almost impossible, at least for the first, and
finally in which it serves different uses relative to the organs around
which it forms a humid atmosphere.


_Blood Vessels._

Do blood vessels enter into the structure of the serous membranes?
These vessels are very numerous around them, as is seen in the
peritoneum, the pericardium, the pleura, &c.; they wind upon their
external surface and ramify there. But I have always doubted whether
the greatest number of those which are thus contiguous to them, really
make a part of their texture, and I am even convinced of the contrary.
The following considerations support my opinion. 1st. When these
vessels are injected, they can be easily raised with a scalpel from the
external face of these membranes, without injuring their continuity,
which can never be done in the fibrous or mucous membranes. 2d. No
blood vessel is discoverable on these membranes which are free on
both faces. The arachnoides at the base of the cranium furnishes an
example of this. 3d. The vessels frequently change relations with these
membranes. I have proved above that when the omentum is applied to the
stomach when it is full, the vessels that are between its layers, do
not mount with it upon this viscus, on account of the great stomachic
coronary which opposes it. When dead bodies having large hernias are
injected, the vessels that wind in the ordinary state upon the surface
of the peritoneum which corresponds to the ring, are not seen extending
below upon the hernial sac. Certainly the vessels that are observed
in the broad ligaments of the womb, do not follow them in the great
displacements they undergo in pregnancy.

I think it then very probable that the serous membranes have but very
few blood vessels; what are called arteries of the peritoneum, the
pleura, &c. are but trunks winding on their external surface, capable
of abandoning it when they are displaced, being as it were foreign
to them, not entering immediately into their structure, to which the
absorbent, exhalant and cellular systems almost alone contribute. No
doubt communications exist between the arterial system and the serous
membranes, by means of the exhalants; but nothing precise is yet known
upon the nature, arrangement, and to a certain extent even, the
functions of these vessels.


III. _Varieties of Organization of the Serous System._

We have seen the mucous system exhibiting in each part where it is
found, numerous differences of structure and varying in each region
and in each organ. The serous system varies also, though less than the
preceding. 1st. Each membrane has its peculiar structure. Compare for
example, the arachnoides and the peritoneum; the one fine, delicate
and transparent, yields to the least effort, has no resistance, tears
almost as soon as it is touched, never remains whole at the base of
the cranium, where it is free, if the brain is raised ever so little,
and has, when pressed between the fingers, a remarkable softness. The
other, thicker and more compact, bears without breaking all the efforts
imparted to the abdominal viscera; it can be pulled with impunity. Its
texture is wholly different. 2d. The different portions of the serous
membranes have not the same organization; the omentum is for example
evidently dependant upon the peritoneum and yet it does not resemble
it. I have observed that the intestinal portion of this membrane is
much more delicate than its hepatic, mesenteric portions, &c. That
the half of the tunica vaginalis which lines the albuginea and is
identified with it, is certainly not the same as the half which is
free on the side of the dartos muscle. I cannot say precisely in what
these differences consist; but the external appearance is sufficient to
establish them.

Ought we then to be surprised, if all the serous surfaces are not
equally subject to the same diseases; if inflammation attacks them
with such different degrees of violence; if it takes place ten times
upon the pleura to once that it appears upon the arachnoides; if in
the pericardium, the tunica vaginalis and the peritoneum, it does not
exhibit the same symptoms; if dropsies vary also wonderfully in each;
if the slow inflammations attack them differently, &c.? The pericardium
is subject to an affection which I have seen upon no other serous
surface, and which is yet extremely frequent upon this; I refer to
the white layers, more or less broad, that are formed on its internal
surface, which would be thought at first view to belong to its texture,
which can however be raised from it leaving it sound. I do not know
whence these layers come; do they correspond to the false membranes of
the pleura?

Neither should we be surprised at what has been said of the varieties
which the same membrane exhibits in its diseases. Frequently the whole
of the peritoneum is diseased, and the omentum remains sound and vice
versa. The layers of which I have just spoken are seen upon the cardiac
portion, and not upon the free portion of the pericardium.

Observe however that all the diseases of this system have a common
character which is evidently derived from the analogy of organization.
This and the synovial are the only ones in which large serous
collections take place, in which slow and tubercular inflammations
are formed. The most of their modes of adhesion belong only to
the serous system. Inflammation has a peculiar and distinctive
character in it, of which all the serous membranes partake with some
modifications. The inflammation of the meninges had been classed among
the serous phlegmasias, from the analogy of the symptoms, before I
had demonstrated that the arachnoides, one of these meninges, belongs
essentially to the serous system. It is on account of this membrane,
and not on account of the dura-mater which is of a fibrous nature, that
phrenitis should be referred to the diaphanous membranes.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.


I. _Properties of Texture. Extensibility._

The serous membranes are endowed with an extensibility much more
limited, than the enormous dilatations of which they are capable in
certain cases, would at first lead us to believe. The mechanism of
their dilatation evidently proves it. This mechanism depends upon
three principal causes; 1st, upon the development of the folds that
they form, and this is the most powerful of the three causes. Hence
why the peritoneum, which of all the membranes of this class, is the
most exposed to dilatations, as from pregnancy, ascites and visceral
enlargements, more frequent there than elsewhere; hence, I say, why
the peritoneum exhibits so great a number of these folds, such as the
mesentery, the mesocolon, the mesorectum, the two omentums, the fatty
appendices, the fold of the cæcal appendix, the broad ligaments of
the womb, the posterior ones of the bladder, &c. &c. Hence why also
these folds are seen around organs subject to habitual alternations of
dilatation and contraction, as around the stomach, the intestines, the
womb and the bladder; very evident in the second state, but slightly
apparent in the first. 2d. The enlargement of the serous cavities
belongs to the displacements of which their membranes are capable. Thus
when the liver is considerably enlarged, its serous membrane increases
its extent in part at the expense of that of the diaphragm, which being
drawn is detached and applied upon the enlarged viscus. I have seen,
in an aneurism of the heart, the pericardium which had been able to
yield but very little, detached in part from the portion of the great
vessels which it covered. 3d. Finally, the texture of these membranes
undergoes a real distension and elongation. But it is in general the
least sensible cause of the enlargement of their cavity; it is only
in the great enlargements that it has an evident influence; in common
cases, the two first causes are almost always sufficient.

I will make an important remark upon the subject of the displacements
of which the serous membranes are the seat in the motions of their
respective organs; it is that these displacements are very painful when
these membranes are inflamed. When the dilated intestines separate the
two diseased layers of the mesentery to lie between them, when the
stomach goes between those of the omentum, &c. when the peritoneum
is inflamed, the patient suffers much. Hence why flatulence is then
so painful, why it is then necessary to avoid taking at once a great
quantity of drink. We know the acute pain that a long inspiration
produces in pleurisy; it is because the lungs then dilate the pleura,
and tend to go between the folds which accompany the great pulmonary
vessels.


_Contractility._

It corresponds with the extensibility; it is less consequently than it
at first appears to be. When the peritoneum for example is contracted,
its different folds are formed; it returns to its place after having
experienced locomotions. But it cannot be denied that in great
dilatations these two properties are very sensible; for example, in
hydrocele as the water is evacuated, the tunica vaginalis evidently
contracts. The peritoneum after the paracentesis of the abdomen
exhibits the same phenomenon. At the time of performing the operation
of empyema, the pleura does not experience it so sensibly, not from
defect of contractility, but because on the one hand it adheres to the
ribs which do not contract, and on the other if the effusion is of
long standing, the lungs are so flattened by the pressure, that the
air can no longer dilate them, so that there remains a space between
the costal and pulmonary portion, which is filled with air. A similar
space would also remain at the moment of the operation, if the serum of
hydrocephalus was evacuated.

After long distensions, the serous membranes no longer contract;
the tunica vaginalis remains flaccid after frequent punctures, the
peritoneum after frequent pregnancies, &c. &c.


II. _Vital Properties._

The serous surfaces, being removed from the action of external bodies,
do not enjoy in the natural state the properties which put the living
organs in relation with external bodies; they have neither animal
sensibility nor contractility. Thus they would be very improper for
external integuments, or for linings of the organs which the mucous
membranes cover; they would give in fact no other sensation than
that of an obscure and indistinct feeling. They answer very well for
envelopes, integuments for internal organs, but not for sensible
envelopes. We have a proof of it in living animals in whom we can
irritate these membranes with impunity. I have many times seen dogs
in whom I had left the spleen drawn out of the abdomen, in order to
observe the phenomena arising from it, tear this organ without being
in a state of fury, eat it even and be thus nourished by their own
substance. They also often tear without pain the exterior of their
intestines when in experiments these are drawn out, and the animals are
left some time to themselves.

When external bodies are in contact with the serous system, they change
its natural state; they inflame it, as we see in the peritoneum, in the
tunica vaginalis laid bare, as we observe also always when a foreign
body introduced into the system acts upon them. Surgeons, as we know,
even employ this means to which they would in vain have recourse in the
mucous membranes, in order to procure artificial adhesions between the
parietes of these membranes. The different morbid irritations inflame
much more frequently the serous surfaces which in this state acquire
a very acute sensibility, greater even than that of the integuments;
so that these inflamed surfaces would be equally improper to serve for
integuments, because external bodies would excite them painfully.

The sensible organic contractility is nothing in the serous system; but
the insensible and the corresponding sensibility are kept in permanent
exercise in it, 1st, by the continual exhalation and absorption that
are going on there; 2d, by nutrition. These two properties are then
those which predominate in this system; thus upon their alterations
all its diseases turn. Acute inflammations, chronic inflammations with
tubercles, adhesions, dropsies, exhalations of pus, of milky serum, &c.
&c. are all derived from an excess, a defect or an alteration of these
two properties of the serous system. It is then also almost exclusively
that sympathies are put into action in it; so that the serous membranes
diseased either idiopathically or sympathetically exhibit always a
series of phenomena all of which suppose an increased internal motion,
or loss of tone in the exhalant and absorbent capillaries, and in the
peculiar texture of those membranes; whilst in the animal muscular, the
organic muscular systems, &c. these predominant affections which are
marked by convulsions and paralysis in one, and by irregular motions of
irritability in the other, do not suppose this internal alteration of
the texture of the diseased organ. Hence why these two last systems,
though frequently disturbed during life, exhibit but few changes
after death, whilst the serous system is a vast field for the morbid
anatomist.


_Sympathies._

The serous surfaces are capable of being influenced by the affections
of the other organs; this is very evident in the organic diseases of
the heart, the lungs, the liver, the spleen, the stomach, the womb,
&c. organs, which without having any known connexion of functions
with the serous surfaces, influence them however so that all their
morbid defects of organization are accompanied, in the latter periods,
by different serous collections in the great cavities, collections
evidently owing to a derangement of the organs which constantly exhale
this fluid. I shall make upon this point two observations; the first
is that the serous surfaces nearest the diseased organ, are in general
the most susceptible of being influenced by it. Thus in the diseases of
the heart and the lungs, the serous collections take place especially
in the thorax, whilst ascites is always the first consequence of
enlargements of the liver, the spleen, &c. the pleura and the
pericardium being filled subsequently. We know that most sarcoceles
are complicated with dropsies of the tunica vaginalis; whence results
hydro-sarcocele, a disease which surgeons consider separately, but
which is the same as those of the preceding cases, which might in
this respect be called hydro-phthisis, chronic hydro-hepatitis,
hydro-carcinoma of the womb, &c.

The second observation that I have to make is, that whenever the serum
is thus collected in the cavities, in consequence of an organic disease
of a viscus foreign to the membrane, this serum is limpid, transparent,
and probably of the same nature as that which circulates in the
lymphatic vessels. The exhalants which form it not being then in fact
diseased, their action not being increased or that of the absorbents
diminished except by sympathy, the fluid must remain the same. Thus
though there is suffering at the end of the glans from a stone in
the bladder, the glans is perfectly sound, and the mucous fluid that
escapes from it is of the same nature as in the ordinary state. On
the contrary, when dropsies depend upon a disease of texture of the
serous surfaces, as for example upon a tubercular inflammation, or even
an acute one, which has degenerated, &c. the effused serum is almost
always altered; it is milky, or there are albuminous flakes in it,
or a false membrane, &c. I have made this observation, which I think
interesting, upon nearly all the bodies I have opened.

In acute diseases, the serous surfaces receive also equally the
sympathetic influence of the affected organs. If we could then see
them, we should find that they were like the skin, more or less moist,
more or less dry, according to the different periods of the disease.
What proves it is, that at the death which follows the disease, the
serum of the pleura, the pericardium, the peritoneum, &c. varies
remarkably. Sometimes it is evidently increased, at others it is almost
nothing; this depends upon the time in which the subject died. If it is
whilst exhalation is very abundant, we find much serum; it is almost
nothing if life has been sufficiently prolonged to allow absorption to
take place. If the surrounding air did not dissolve the sweat, or if
the skin was in the form of a sac, we should find it with very variable
degrees of moisture, according as the subjects had died in sweat, or
with a suppression of the cutaneous exhalation.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.


I. _State of this System in the First Age._

All the serous surfaces are extremely delicate in the fœtus. In opening
the thorax by a longitudinal section of the sternum and examining the
pleura in the mediastinum where it is free on both sides, it is found
to have less thickness than the transparent layers of the omentum or
the arachnoides in the adult. The peritoneum is a little thicker in
proportion, but yet its delicacy is very great. The comparison of soap
bubbles is hardly sufficient to convey an idea of the fineness of the
texture of the omentum and the arachnoides.

At this period the fluid that lubricates the serous surfaces is much
more unctuous and viscid than it is afterwards; by carrying the fingers
over these surfaces at the different ages, the difference is easily
perceived. It might almost be said that the tangible qualities of the
serous fluids then approximate those of the synovia. I know not to what
this difference belongs.

Besides, the quantity of these fluids does not appear to be so great in
proportion as that of the cellular fluids, with which they have however
so much analogy; which is probably owing to this, that the internal
motions being less numerous, on account of the inaction of most of the
organic muscles, less fluid is necessary to lubricate the surfaces.

The growth of the serous system is always in proportion to that of the
organs which it covers. The arachnoides is larger in proportion than
it will be in the adult; it seems even, like the brain, to become then
the seat of a more active labour; thus diseases are more frequent in
it. The increase of exhalation is more common in it than in all the
other serous sacs; hence hydrocephalus.

At birth, when the internal motions become suddenly very numerous,
on account of respiration, digestion and the excretions, I presume
that the serous surfaces become the seat of a more active exhalation.
Besides, as very little blood penetrates them, the sudden production
of the red blood and its entrance by the arterial system, where it
succeeds the black blood, produces less changes upon them than upon the
mucous surfaces and the muscular system.

The serous membranes grow like the other organs; for a long time
delicate and diaphanous, they gradually thicken as we advance in age,
and become of a dull white. Their suppleness diminishes as their
density increases; they resist the different reagents so much the less
as the subjects are younger. In infants, maceration and ebullition
reduce them much more quickly to a homogeneous pulp.

I have observed that in the fœtus which has become putrid, there is
often collected different gases in the serous cavities, as may be
proved by opening these cavities under water; a phenomenon much less
evident in the adult, in whom the cellular texture is often wholly
emphysematous by the putrefactive motion, without the escape of any
thing by the canula of a trochar which is plunged into the peritoneal
cavity or into that of the pleura, as I have many times ascertained. In
general, there is disengaged much more aeriform fluid from the organs
of the fœtus, than from those of the adult, in the experiments of
maceration.


II. _State of the Serous System in the after Ages._

In the adult, the serous system remains a long time without undergoing
any very sensible change; its membranes follow only the laws of
the organs they surround. Thus in the age nearest youth, the serous
surfaces of the chest are the most frequent seat of inflammations,
dropsies, &c.; whilst in that bordering on old age the inferior
surfaces like the peritoneum, are the more often affected.

In old age, the serous system becomes dense and compact; its adhesions
to the neighbouring parts are more evident; thus it is less capable of
the different locomotions of which we have spoken. Its forces, which
are weakened, render absorption in it less easy; it is the frequent
seat of dropsy. When it is affected with some diseases, its want of
energy imparts to them a remarkable chronic character. There are many
old people at the Hôtel Dieu with tubercular inflammations of the
peritoneum, which they have had for a long time, whilst young persons
are overcome much quicker by the same inflammations. Thus cancers in
aged persons often remain almost inert, they frequently are not even
painful, whilst their periods are usually most rapid in adults.

The serous effusions are more rare than the infiltrations of the
sub-cutaneous cellular texture in old people; but they take place more
commonly than those of the intermuscular texture.

The serous system becomes ossified, but not like the arterial, the
cartilaginous, &c. from the natural effect of age. Its membranes are
not constantly found osseous in old age, and when this phenomenon takes
place, it happens at every age. It is a disease, a real tumour, whilst
in the arteries and the cartilages it appears to belong to a natural
series of functions. I have a preparation in which the arachnoides is
evidently osseous in many points, and as it is upon the dura-mater that
these productions are formed, their existence serves very well to prove
that the arachnoides is distinct from it; for at the place where they
are found, they can be easily separated from each other.


III. _Preternatural Development of the Serous System._

I shall not repeat here what I have said, in speaking of the cellular
texture, upon the formation of the different cysts. These cysts,
completely analogous to the natural serous membranes, should be really
considered as a preternatural development of these membranes in the
economy; they have the same appearance and almost the same texture,
furnish their fluid according to the same laws, and appear to be the
seat of a constant exhalation and absorption; since they are in vain
emptied by puncture, their fluids are always reproduced, until they are
removed. For example compare the cyst which has grown preternaturally
along the spermatic cord, with the tunica vaginalis filled with water
in hydrocele. If the size of these tumours, which are often found
together, is the same, it is impossible to discover any difference in
their form, appearance, texture, properties, functions, &c.




SYNOVIAL SYSTEM.


I place this system at the side of the serous, because it has the
greatest analogy with it, under the relations, 1st, of its form, which
is in each of these organs that of a sac without an opening; 2d, of
its texture, which appears to be essentially cellular; 3d, of its
functions, which consist in an alternation of exhalation and absorption.

What establishes a real line of demarcation between these two systems
is, 1st, that the fluids which lubricate their membranes appear to
differ in their composition, though there is much resemblance between
them. 2d. In dropsical diatheses which affect at the same time the
cellular texture and all the serous surfaces of the peritoneum, the
pleura, &c. the affection does not extend to the synovial membranes,
which indicates a difference of structure, though we do not know
what this difference is. 3d. And reciprocally in dropsies of the
articulations, an affection in general very rare, and in those of the
tendinous synovial capsules, there is no concomitant affection of
the membranes of the great cavities. 4th. The fluid of the articular
dropsies does not resemble that which fills the great cavities in the
same disease. 5th. The synovial membranes are much more rarely than
the serous, the seat of those slow and tubercular inflammations which
the serous surfaces so often exhibit. I have however seen two examples
of it in the synovial membrane of the knee. I believe that these two
systems are the only ones in which this disease is observed; so that
it is by its existence a character of resemblance, and by its rarity
or frequency, a distinguishing attribute. 6th. The different kinds of
adhesions of which I have spoken as taking place on the serous surface,
are not met with on the synovial surfaces, where we see only that which
identifies these two adhering surfaces, a mode which frequently takes
place in anchylosis, which is also as often occasioned by it, as by the
stiffness of the parts surrounding the articulation. 7th. The synovial
surfaces are not as often as the serous, the seat of those remarkable
locomotions of which we have spoken; which depends on this, that the
articular organs are not, like the most of those covered with serous
surfaces, subject to alternate dilatations and contractions.

The synovial system exhibits evidently two great divisions. To one
belongs the articular system, to the other that of the tendinous
grooves. Each shall be examined separately.


ARTICLE FIRST.

ARTICULAR SYNOVIAL SYSTEM.

I believe that I first described this essential portion of the synovial
system. I shall relate here what I have said of it elsewhere. I shall
examine first how it is separated from the blood, afterwards the fluid
itself, and then I shall describe the organ which furnishes it.


I. _How the Synovia is separated from the mass of Blood._

Every fluid differing from the blood, can be separated from it to be
afterwards transmitted to an organ, but in one of the three following
ways; 1st, by secretion, a function characterized by the existence of
a gland intermediate to the blood vessels that bring the materials to
it, and the excretories which carry off the result; 2d, by exhalation,
a function distinguished from the first, by the absence of this
intermediate gland, and by the immediate continuity of the blood
vessel and the exhaling duct; 3d, by transudation, a phenomenon purely
physical, almost always happening after death, rarely observed during
life, a simple transmission of a fluid by the pores of an organ,
towards which it is mechanically determined. Let us examine which of
these three modes is that chosen by nature to deposit the synovia upon
the articular surfaces.

_Is the synovia transmitted by secretion to the articular surfaces?_

We are indebted to Clopton Havers for the system which places in
the glands the sources of the synovia. Many authors had designated
obscurely before him these organs in the articulations; but he
made them the particular object of his researches, described them
in the different articulations, divided them into two classes, the
one principal, the other accessory, and assigned them characters
so evident, that according to him, they could not be forgotten.
Reddish bunches, spongy, formed by membranes folded upon themselves,
situated sometimes without, and sometimes within the articulations,
always arranged so as to be protected from too strong a compression,
and pouring out through ducts in the form of fringe the fluid they
secrete; such are the characters drawn by Havers, which all anatomists
since him admire, and the correctness of which the most modern and
distinguished authors have acknowledged in their works.

Some anatomists of this age have however thrown doubts upon these
glandular bodies. Lieutaud confounds them with the fatty cellular
texture. Desault did not distinguish them from it. Every thing confirms
me in the same opinion, which many considerations appear to establish
in an undoubted manner. The following are these considerations; 1st,
these reddish bunches are met with only in certain articulations. There
are many of them in which their existence cannot be established but by
supposition. 2d. The greatest number of the synovial membranes of the
tendons certainly do not exhibit any of them, though Havers, Albinus,
Juncke and Fourcroy admit them in all, founded no doubt upon analogy
and not upon inspection. Yet the synovia is separated equally in both
cases, and lubricates the surfaces of the articulations and of the
tendinous sheaths; this separation is then independent of glandular
action. 3d. If the best marked synovial glands are examined, such as
that of the cotyloid cavity, no trace can be discovered there of this
parenchyma of an unknown nature, but remarkable for its structure,
which composes in general the glands, and which distinguishes them
from every other part and forms their true organic character. 4th.
No excretory duct can be demonstrated in these organs. Those in the
form of fringes, admitted by Havers, are imaginary. Bertin himself
has acknowledged this truth, though he attributed to these bodies a
glandular structure. The transudation of the fluids injected by the
arteries in the neighbourhood of the articulation, proves the existence
of these ducts no better than it establishes them in the cavities of
the serous membranes in which it also takes place, and yet in which
it is well proved that no gland pours out the albuminous fluid
that constantly lubricates these cavities. 5th. Inflation resolves
completely these fatty bunches into cellular texture. Maceration
produces the same effect. When gradual and long continued ebullition
has removed all the fat from them, there remains only a mass of cells
pressed together, and similar to those of the common cellular texture.
6th. The glandular character is manifested in certain morbid cases, by
a peculiar swelling and hardening, of which the other organs except the
glands, such as the muscles, the tendons, &c. never offer an example.
The liver, the kidneys, the salivary organs, all the considerable
glands are remarkable for this. So true is this character, that it
serves to indicate glands, the delicacy of which conceals them in the
natural state. For example, the existence of the cryptæ of the stomach,
the urethra, and several other mucous membranes, is founded first upon
the analogy of the other membranes of this class, but principally upon
the preternatural development which these cryptæ acquire in certain
diseases. Never, on the contrary, do the pretended synovial glands
present to the observer a similar development. Always in the diseases
of the articulations, a common swelling seems to identify them with the
neighbouring cellular texture. They have not like the other glands,
affections distinct from those of this texture, no doubt because
they have not a peculiar vitality, because being mere elongations of
the neighbouring cellular texture, they partake of its nature and
properties, and ought consequently to partake of all its conditions,
as it in its turn ought immediately to receive the influence of their
affections.

The considerations which I have just offered successively form, I
think, sufficient data to resolve the problem proposed above, by
establishing as an incontestable proposition, that the synovia is not
transmitted by secretion to the articular surfaces.

Let us examine the second mode of transmission stated by authors.

_Is the synovia transmitted by transudation to the articular surfaces?_

It was an opinion anciently received, that the marrow of the long bones
oozes through the pores of their extremities and through those of the
cartilages which terminate them, to lubricate the articular surfaces.
Havers renewed this idea forgotten at the time he wrote, united this
source of the synovia to that which had placed it in the glands, and
thus formed of this fluid a mixture composed of two fluids differently
transmitted to the articulation. The most of those who succeeded him
partook of his opinion upon this point. Those even, such as Desault,
who rejected the existence of the articular glands and the secretion
of synovia, admitted the transudation of it founded upon the following
observations. 1st. A long bone, stripped of its soft parts and exposed
to the air, allows a fatty oozing to pass through the pores of its
cartilages which does not cease till the medullary juice is completely
exhausted. 2d. The mechanical compression of the cartilaginous
extremity of a long bone produces for a moment the same effect. Are
these facts, which are evident in the dead bone, also real in the
living one? Different considerations, which I will now state, induce
one to believe the contrary.

1st. The vital forces, the effect of which is to impart to all the
organs which they animate a degree of tone sufficient to resist the
entrance of the fluids, leave, when they are extinct, the fibres of
these same organs in a state of laxity that renders them everywhere
permeable. Thus transudation is now considered as hardly any thing
else than a phenomenon that takes place only after death, which, if
transformed into a vital one, would offer an evident exception to
the laws of nature that are especially characterized by simplicity
and uniformity. 2d. The fatty oozing takes place in the experiment
noticed above, not only through the pores of the cartilages, but also
through those of the whole surface of the bone; so that by reasoning
from what has been here observed upon the dead body, it is evident that
during life the whole bone would be, if you may so say, immersed in
an atmosphere of synovia, a consequence, which being proved false by
the most simple inspection, demonstrates the falsity of the principle
deduced from it. 3d. The articulations of the cartilages of the larynx
are lubricated like those of the bones, by the synovial fluid; and yet
here all transudation of marrow is impossible, as it does not exist
in the substances of the cartilages. 4th. The marrow is almost always
sound in diseases which, affecting the articulations alter the fluid
that lubricates them. And reciprocally the synovia does not take a
different character in the affections of the interior of the bones,
which have an influence especially upon the medullary organ. 5th.
Finally, the experiment that I have made, and which has been stated in
the article upon the marrow, evidently proves the non-transudation of
this fluid.

Desault, in order to explain the manner in which the synovia is
separated from the blood, added to this pretended transudation of
the marrow, an oozing furnished by all the parts contained in the
articulation, such as the capsular and inter-articular ligaments, the
internal fat, the cartilages, &c. A comparison will suffice to show the
value of this hypothesis. What should we say of a system in which to
explain the production of the serous fluid of the abdomen, the source
of it should be placed in the liver, the spleen, the intestines, and in
general in all the organs of this cavity? No doubt we should answer,
that a fluid of the same nature, could not be furnished by parts of
such different structure, that it is much more simple to search for
a single source in the single membrane that covers all the gastric
viscera. The application is exact and the analogy perfect between it
and the articular cavity.

We can, I believe, without fear of error, conclude from all that has
been said above, that the synovia is not transmitted by transudation to
the articular surfaces.

I will now examine the last mode pointed out for the separation of the
synovia.

_Is the synovia transmitted by exhalation to the articular surfaces?_

The solution of the two preceding problems seem naturally to lead
to that of the question which we here propose. The certainty of
the two following data may, I think, be relied on; 1st. Secretion,
exhalation and transudation are the only means by which a fluid
different from the blood can be transmitted to an organ. 2d. Secretion
and transudation are foreign to the transmission of the synovia.
Now from these two certain data, can we not draw this conclusion as
certain, that exhalation is the mode by which the synovia is carried
to the articulations? But let us add to these negative proofs some
considerations which establish this proposition positively.

The most striking relations are observed between the synovia and the
fluid that lubricates the parietes of the serous membranes. 1st. The
relation of composition. These two fluids are essentially albuminous.
Albumen predominates in both, though a little different in each, as
Marguerron has demonstrated. Havers had previously pointed out this
analogy; he knew that these two fluids are coagulable by alkohol,
the acids, and caloric, without knowing the principle to which this
property is owing. 2d. The relation of functions. Both are destined to
lubricate surfaces on which much motion takes place, to diminish the
friction which is the inevitable consequence of it and to prevent fatal
adhesions. Both are in the same state on their respective surfaces;
it is merely a dew spread upon these surfaces, and soon taken up from
them. 3d. The relation of affections. Inflammation dries up the source
of both, and produces adhesions, more common in the serous membranes
and more rare in the articulations in which they produce anchylosis.
Both are subject to preternatural enlargement, which is designated
by a common word, viz. dropsy. 4th. The relation of absorption. The
lymphatic system is for both the way by which they re-enter the
circulation, after having remained sufficiently long upon their
respective surfaces.

Do not these various resemblances, which with some slight differences
of composition only, so evidently connect the synovia with the fluid
of the serous membranes, lead us to this very simple consequence, viz.
that these two fluids being analogous in all other respects must be
so also as to the manner in which they are separated from the mass of
blood? Now it is a point in physiology at the present day generally
acknowledged, that the fluid of the serous membranes is brought to them
by exhalation; then we are evidently lead by induction to this which
answers the question proposed above; The synovia is transmitted by
exhalation to the articular surfaces.

This rigorous and accurate conclusion drawn from obvious and uniform
facts will become, I think, a demonstrated truth, when to the analogies
already established we shall add that of the membranous organ, the
essential seat of the exhalation of the synovia.


II. _Remarks upon the Synovia._

Thus separated from the mass of blood, the synovia has the appearance
of a white, viscid and transparent fluid. It ropes, like some syrups,
when it flows from the articulations. This unctuous property renders it
peculiarly fit to lubricate the articular surfaces which rub together,
and to protect them from violent shocks.

Its quantity varies; there are articulations which contain much of it;
that of the ankle has always appeared to me to have the most of it.
Then come the ilio-femoral, the scapulo-humeral, the humero-cubital,
&c. There are others in which there is scarcely any; such are the
sterno-clavicular, the sterno-costals, the costo-vertebrals, &c. It
is not the smallness of the synovial surfaces that occasions in these
articulations the constant dryness that is observed in them; for the
synovial sacs of the larynx, which are much smaller, are much more
moist.

Besides, the synovia does not vary in quantity in each articulation,
like the serum in the serous membranes. Those who have opened
peritoneums, pleuras, pericardiums, &c. must have seen that hardly
two are similar; sometimes there is only a mere dew, at others there
is a real collection of fluid. Here on the contrary there is always
nearly the same quantity; which is owing to this, that the synovial
surface does not feel as easily as the serous surfaces, the sympathetic
influences of the other organs when diseased.

The synovia is not subject to the different alterations which the
serous fluids exhibit. I have never seen upon the articular surfaces
what are called false membranes from inflammation. The preternatural
collections of synovia never contain those white flakes, so common in
the serous collections. I do not know of an example of milky serum
effused in an articulation. One of the most frequent alterations of
the synovia is that, I think, in which it takes the consistence of a
jelly and is of a reddish colour, analogous, if I may be allowed the
comparison, to currant jelly. Now this alteration is wholly foreign to
the serous fluids.

These essential differences which the synovia and the serum exhibit
in their alterations, evidently suppose a diversity of nature in the
principles which compose them in the natural state. The viscidity of
one and the greater fluidity of the other, also declare it, as Fourcroy
has observed. This diversity of nature appears to depend especially
upon a peculiar substance which enters into the composition of the
synovia, which few animal fluids possess, which Marguerron who has
observed it designates by the name of albumen of a peculiar nature, and
which should be the object of new researches.

I shall not give here the details of the analysis of the synovia; they
belong to animal chemistry.


III. _Of the Synovial Membranes._

We have seen all the great cavities lined by the serous membranes,
which form by their folds species of sacs without an opening, and which
embrace both the organs and the parietes of these cavities. There
exists in all the moveable articulations membranes precisely analogous,
the uses of which are the same, the nature of which is not different
and which I call synovial, because their parietes constantly exhale and
absorb synovia.


_Forms._

Every synovial membrane then, should be considered as a sac without an
opening, spread upon the organs of articulation, upon the diarthrodial
cartilages, upon the internal face of the lateral and capsular
ligaments, upon the whole of the inter-articular ligaments when they
exist, upon the prominent fatty bunches in some articular cavities, &c.
It is from it that these different organs borrow the smooth, polished
and shining appearance which characterizes them in these cavities, and
which they have not elsewhere. Just as by dissecting carefully the
gastric organs, the peritoneum can be removed, its sac remaining whole,
so we can conceive of the possibility of separating this membrane,
notwithstanding the intimate adhesions it forms in some places. All
the parts that it embraces are out of the articular cavity, though
projecting into this cavity, as the lungs are found on the exterior
of the sac formed by the pleura, the liver on the exterior of the
peritoneal sac, &c. &c.

The synovial membrane is found in all the moveable articulations, the
greatest number of which has only it and the lateral ligaments. What is
commonly called the fibrous capsule is only met with around some of the
articular surfaces. The connexions of the humerus, the femur, and one
or two other bones, the extremities of which are joined by enarthrosis,
present the only examples of it. There are seen in these articulations
two very distinct coverings. One which is fibrous is external, and is
found arranged in the form of a sac open above and below, embracing
by its two great openings the surfaces of the two bones, and being
intermixed around them with the periosteum, the fibres of both
interlace with each other. The other cellular, which is the synovial
membrane, lines the first on the interior, separates afterwards from
it when it arrives towards the two diarthrodial cartilages, and is
reflected upon them, instead of being united to the periosteum. Boyer
has pointed out this arrangement in regard to the femur.

In all the ginglymoid articulations, as in those of the elbow, the
knee, the phalanges, the hand, the foot, &c. &c. the fibrous capsule
is wholly wanting. The fibres, instead of extending and interlacing
in the form of a membrane, are collected into fasciculi more or less
thick, which form the lateral ligaments. There is only found in them
the internal layer of the enarthrodial articulations, that is to say
the synovial membrane, which does not contract here any adhesion with
the periosteum, but is reflected upon the cartilages. By taking it at
the place of this reflection, it can be detached far enough to prove
that it has an external organization wholly different from that which
the idea of a capsular ligament at first presents to the mind. This
arrangement is very easily perceived by the least dissection, at the
knee behind the tendon of the cruræus and the inferior ligament of the
patella, at the elbow under the tendon of the triceps, at the phalanges
under that of the extensor, &c. All the arthrodial articulations have
also an analogous organization, as will be seen in the Descriptive
Anatomy; so that it is ascertained that the fibrous capsules exist but
in a very small number of articulations, that almost all have only
synovial sacs which are spread out and reflected upon the osseous
surfaces, without being attached around them, as all authors have said.

I have proved this remarkable difference of the articulations by many
dissections. Some anatomists were in the way to discover it, when they
observed that the different capsules appeared to be wholly formed of
cellular texture. It is in fact the texture of the synovial membrane,
which differs essentially in this from the fibrous capsules. The mode
of capsule for all articulations may be preserved, if it is wished, but
different ideas must then necessarily be attributed to it. Compare, for
example, the fibrous capsule of the femur with the synovial capsule
of the knee; you will find on the one hand, 1st, a cylindrical sac
with two great openings for the osseous extremities, and with many
small ones for the vessels; 2d, a fibrous interlacing, similar to
that of the tendons, the aponeuroses, &c.; 3d, a mode of sensibility
analogous to that of these organs; 4th, the use of retaining strongly
in place the articulated bones, which have only this bond to strengthen
their union. On the other hand you will observe, 1st, a sac without
an opening; 2d, a cellular structure, the same as that of the serous
membranes; 3d, a sensibility of the same nature as theirs; 4th, the
simple function of containing the synovia and separating it, the bones
being tied by strong ligaments. Besides, the different reagents have
upon the fibrous capsules an influence wholly different from that which
they exert upon the synovial. Ebullition yellows them, renders them
semi-transparent, softens them like tendons and gradually melts them
like gelatine. The synovial ones boiled remain whitish, and furnish but
little of this substance. I would observe that the yellowish tinge and
semi-transparency of the boiled fibrous capsules are a certain means of
distinguishing the articulations in which they exist and those which
are destitute of them.

The existence of the synovial capsule in the greatest number of
articulations in which it is found alone, is placed beyond a doubt by
the slightest inspection. In those in which it is united to a fibrous
capsule, it is very clearly distinguished in several places. Thus in
the thigh, it is found upon the interarticular ligament, upon the
fatty bunch in the cotyloid cavity, and upon the neck of the bone
at the places where it leaves the fibrous capsule, to be reflected
upon the cartilages, &c.; but its adhesion to these cartilages and to
the internal face of the capsule, may excite some doubts as to its
arrangement in the form of a sac everywhere closed, which we have
attributed to it; it is then essential to offer some considerations
that may dissipate these doubts.

1st. However strong the adhesions of the synovial membrane may be,
they can be destroyed without a solution of continuity, by a slow,
careful dissection begun at the place where the membrane is reflected
from the cartilage upon the capsule. It can be taken away in parts
after long continued maceration. 2d. In consequence of certain
inflammations, this membrane acquires a thickness and opacity which
enable us to distinguish it from all the neighbouring organs, from
those even to which it adheres the most. 3d. The synovial bags are
all as adherent as the articular synovial one, to the cartilages of
their sheath and to this sheath itself; yet every one acknowledges
their distinct existence. 4th. There are articulations with a fibrous
capsule, in which the fibres are separated so as to leave a space
between them through which the synovia would escape, if the synovial
membrane did not line them. When air is forced into the articulation,
this membrane rises up in these spaces and exhibits a texture wholly
different from that of the capsule. Bertin observed this, but thought
that these pellicles were insulated, and did not see that they depended
upon the continuity of the membrane which is extended over the whole
articulation. 5th. We have observed in the article upon the serous
system, that the smooth and polished appearance which the surface
of the organs and the cavities exhibit, is always given to them by
these membranes, and that they never derive it from their peculiar
structure; now we shall see that the synovial membrane has almost
the same texture as the serous; then it appears that in the places
in which the articular organs exhibit this character, it is from it
that they receive it, though it cannot be distinguished as well upon
these organs, as where it is free. Besides, the articulations that are
evidently destitute of this membrane, have not this smooth and polished
appearance. Such are the surfaces of the symphysis pubis, and of the
sacro-iliac symphysis which are found, though contiguous, unequal,
rough, &c. We have also proved that this organic form is never owing to
compression.

From these different considerations we may be easily convinced, I
think, that notwithstanding the adhesion of the synovial membrane
at different points, it should be considered in a manner precisely
analogous to that of the serous membranes, that is to say as a real
sac without an opening, everywhere contiguous and spread upon all the
organs of the articulation. Besides, do not the fibroserous membranes
exhibit similar adhesions, though the separate existence of the two
layers which compose them is generally admitted?

From the idea we have formed of the synovial membrane, it is easy to
conceive how certain organs pass through the articulation, without
the escape of the synovia by the opening which receives or by that
which transmits them. The synovial membrane then reflected around
these organs, forms for them a sheath which separates them from the
fluid and keeps them distinct from the articulation. Thus the tendon
of the biceps is no more contained in the articulation of the arm with
the scapula, than the umbilical vein, the urachus, &c. are in the
peritoneal cavity. With the least care it may be separated from the
portion of membrane which forms its sheath.

The preceding considerations lead us also to find a perfect identity in
the synovial capsules of the tendons and the articular synovial ones.
In the preceding example, these two kinds of membranes are evidently
continuous; for the capsule of the groove of the biceps is of the same
nature as that of the tendons which have a separate one from it, as the
flexors, for example.


_Organization._

We have just seen, that the synovial membrane resembles very much in
its external conformation the class of serous membranes, it does not
less so in its internal organization. This organization is cellular,
as is proved by dissection, inflation and especially maceration. The
sac which the ganglions form is evidently only a production of the
cellular organ; now it is known that this sac exhales and contains a
fluid similar to the synovia. Wherever the synovial membrane is free,
it is attached externally to this organ and is confounded with it in so
direct a manner, that by raising successively its different layers they
are seen to be gradually condensed and finally united together to form
it. So that in the serous membranes no fibre is visible. It becomes
transparent when it is separated accurately on both sides, which is
easily done at the knee to a great extent.

I shall not go back to the various proofs which establish the
cellular structure of the serous system; almost all these proofs are
applicable to the synovial system, which appears to be but a net-work
of absorbents and exhalants. Hence it is easy to understand what the
red and fatty bunches are that are found around the articulations.
They perform in regard to this membrane the functions of the abundant
cellular texture which envelops the peritoneum, the pleura, &c. &c. It
is there that the blood vessels divide ad infinitum before arriving
at the membrane where their ramifications, successively decreasing,
finally terminate in the exhalants.

If a remarkable redness sometimes distinguishes these bunches from
the cellular texture, it is because the vessels are more concentrated
and nearer together in them. For example, in the articulation of the
hip, the synovial membrane of which, almost everywhere adherent, only
corresponds in the fissure of the cotyloid cavity with the cellular
texture, nature has placed there almost all the arterial ramifications
that furnish the synovia; hence the reddish tinge of the cellular bunch
that is found there. On the contrary, at the knee where much cellular
texture surrounds the whole external face of the synovial sac, the
vessels more scattered leave to this texture the same colour as that
of the external face of the serous membranes, &c. This redness of
some pretended synovial glands, the only character that distinguishes
them, is then as it were merely accidental; it no more indicates their
glandular nature, than it proves it in the pia-mater, in which it is
owing to the same cause.

Though the synovial membrane is very analogous to the serous surfaces,
it must however exhibit differences of texture, since the fluid
it exhales is a little different. In fact, by examining it at the
femoro-tibial articulation, where it can be found in considerable
pieces, it is seen to be more dense and compact than the serous
membranes. Its texture has not the suppleness of theirs; when dried, it
is much more brittle; it remains stiff, whilst the serous texture is
moved in all directions without the least effort. It resists maceration
longer.


_Properties._

The properties of texture become evident in articular dropsies, in
which the synovial membranes are at first much distended, and in
which they contract after the puncture, an operation however that is
very rare. Yet it appears that these membranes are only susceptible
of a slow and gradual extension. We know that suddenly separated in
luxations, their parietes tear instead of stretching; they unite again
after the reduction.

Among the vital properties, the organic sensibility is the only
one of this system in the ordinary state, as I have proved by many
experiments on living animals in which these surfaces have been laid
bare and irritated by various agents. But the increase of life which
inflammation produces by raising this sensibility, transforms it into
animal sensibility; this is what is observed, 1st, in the wounds in
which these membranes are exposed to the contact of the air; 2d, in
the long continued irritation they experience from foreign bodies
preternaturally developed in the articulation; 3d, in the various
affections of the articular surfaces, &c.

This kind of sensibility of the synovial membranes serves to confirm
what I have already established above, viz. that most of the
articulations, the ginglymoid especially, are destitute of fibrous
capsules. In fact, I have observed that these capsules, as well as
the lateral ligaments, have a kind of animal sensibility, which is
developed by pulling them; so that if all the neighbouring organs of an
articulation, except the synovial membrane and the lateral ligaments,
are removed and this articulation afterwards twisted, the animal
gives signs of the most acute pain. But afterwards cut the ligaments,
and leave only the synovial membrane, the twisting no longer gives
pain; then there is no fibrous capsule united to the synovial. This
experiment, which is easily repeated upon the fore or hind legs,
enables us to recognise everywhere the articulations in which the
synovial membrane exists alone, and those in which it is found united
to a fibrous capsule. This being of the same texture as the lateral
ligaments, produces the same pains when it is pulled, as is proved
elsewhere by experiments made upon the articulations clothed with these
capsules.

The alternate exhalation and absorption which takes place upon the
serous surfaces, prove the insensible contractility in them.

I have already observed that the synovial surfaces perform but a small
part in the sympathies, that they feel but very slightly the affections
of the other organs. Whilst in the acute affections of the important
viscera, the skin, the mucous surfaces, the cellular texture, the
nerves, &c. &c. have a greater or less sympathetic derangement, all
the synovial membranes remain unaffected; they do not become the seat
of irregular pains, nor of a more active or slower exhalation. They
resemble in this respect the osseous, cartilaginous, and even fibrous
systems. Thus it is not necessary that the physician should seek in the
synovial system a frequent seat of the accessory symptoms in diseases,
of that class of symptoms which does not belong to the injury of the
diseased organ itself, but to its relations with other parts.

In the pains of the articulations, there are certainly cases in which
the synovial membrane is diseased, and others in which the fibrous
organs alone are affected. The distinction of these cases should be
sought.


_Functions._

The synovial membrane adds nothing to the solidity of the articulation.
The fibrous capsules and the lateral ligaments alone serve this
purpose. The smooth surface which the articular extremities derive
from this membrane, favours their motions; it can even in this way
assist the muscular action; thus the portions of synovial membrane
which are found at the knee behind the cruræus, at the elbow under the
triceps, at the phalanges under the flexors, &c. perform in respect to
these muscles, the same functions as the tendinous synovial bags. They
are to their tendons, what the cellular sac which separates the tendons
of the psoas and the iliacus from the crural arch, is to them.

The principal use of the membrane of which we are treating is in
relation to the synovia. It exhales by numerous orifices this
fluid which remains there for some time, and afterwards re-enters
the circulation by absorption. Its parietes are then the seat of
exhalation, as the kidneys, for example, are that of the secretion of
urine. The reservoir of the exhaled fluid is the sac without opening
which it forms, as the bladder is that of the urine that comes from the
kidneys. The excretory vessels of this same fluid are the absorbents
which carry it into the mass of blood, as the urethra carries the urine
from the bladder. There is under these different relations more analogy
than there at first seems to be, between secretion and exhalation.

The phenomena of the continuance of the synovia in this membranous
reservoir, have relation to the synovia itself or to the articular
surfaces. The first consist in a peculiar but unknown alteration which
it undergoes between the exhalant and absorbent systems. The second
contribute to facilitate the articular motions. The unctuous and
slippery coat which the serous surfaces receive from the synovia, is
remarkably adapted to this use, as I have observed.


_Natural Development._

In the fœtus and in infancy most of the synovial membranes are much
larger in proportion than in the after ages, because the articular
surfaces have a greater extent in the cartilaginous than in the osseous
state; but they are then extremely delicate. The synovia is not,
as the serous fluids are at this age, more unctuous and of greater
consistence; it appears even to be less so. Before birth it is in small
quantity, no doubt because the motions are trifling.

In old age I have observed that the synovial membrane becomes more
dense and compact. It loses in part its white colour and becomes grey;
less synovia is exhaled from it. It is not like the serous surfaces,
exposed to dropsies. The rigidity it acquires makes motion painful.
It never ossifies except preternaturally. The phosphate of lime which
gradually invades cartilage, does not take hold of it. I do not know
an instance of an old person in whom bone has been found naked in an
articulation.


_Preternatural Development._

I have already observed in the article on the fibrous capsules, that
when the head of a bone remains displaced in a luxation, it is not a
membrane analogous to these capsules that is developed around it; it
is a real cyst, smooth on its internal surface, moistened with serum,
formed at the expense of the cellular texture, and presenting, with a
little more thickness, the true appearance of the synovial membranes;
it is a preternatural synovial membrane. The motions imparted to the
displaced limb appear to increase the serous exhalation in this new
membrane; hence no doubt the great advantage of these motions, in
order to re-establish in part the mobility of the bones which remain
out of their sockets. I have seen a dancer, the head of whose humerus
was lodged in the hollow of the axilla, after a luxation that was not
reduced, perform very varied motions with it.


ARTICLE SECOND.

SYNOVIAL SYSTEM OF THE TENDONS.

This system noticed by many authors and described by Fourcroy,
Soemmering, &c. is precisely of the same nature as the preceding, from
which it differs only by its situation; it is often even confounded
with it. Thus the synovial membrane of the tendon of the biceps is
continuous with that of the scapulo-humeral articulation; thus those
of the gemelli are so with the synovial membrane of the femoro-tibial
articulation; it is the same membrane which belongs at the same time to
the tendon and to the articulation. A remarkable example of it is seen
in the extensors of the leg and the ham, to the tendons of which the
same articular synovial membrane of the knee serves for a capsule.

But very few tendinous synovial membranes are found in the trunk;
almost all are on the extremities where they serve to assist the
slipping of the tendons. They are met with, 1st, where a tendon is
reflected at an angle upon a bone, as around those of the great lateral
peroneus, the peroneus medius, the obturator internus, the great
oblique of the eye, &c.; 2d, where a tendon slips upon an osseous
surface without being reflected, as at the extremity of the tendo
Achillis, as under that of the great glutæus, and those of the psoas
and iliacus united; 3d, where a tendon slips in a fibrous capsule,
as in those of all the flexors, &c. Their extent is uniformly in
proportion to that of the tendons upon which they are spread.


_Forms; Relations; Synovial Fluid._

The tendinous synovial membranes, are, like the articular ones, sacs
without an opening, spread on the one hand on the tendon and on
the other upon the neighbouring organs. These sacs are differently
shaped according to the arrangement of the tendon, but their general
conformation is uniform. We see from this that every tendinous synovial
membrane has two faces, one which forms the interior of the sac, which
is everywhere free and contiguous to itself, the other which lines the
adjacent organs.

The free surface is constantly moistened by a fluid precisely similar
to that of the articulations, furnished like it by exhalation, and
not as authors have said by red bodies situated in the neighbourhood,
bodies of which oftentimes there is no trace visible, and which, when
they exist, have nothing glandular in them. This fluid is in general
much less abundant than in the articulations, at least in the dead
body. But there are varieties in the different synovial bags; those of
the tendo Achillis, of the tendons of the psoas and iliacus united, of
that of the obturator internus, &c. are always more moist than those of
the flexor tendons, &c.

Is it to the absence of synovia that must be attributed the species
of crepitation which the tendons sometimes make in their motions? I
know not. I would only observe that this crepitation has some analogy
with the crackling noise of the joints of the fingers when they are
bent quickly, a noise, which does not depend, as might be supposed,
on the friction of the osseous surfaces; in fact, when it has been
once produced, it cannot be again, though there may be friction again.
Besides it is known that this crackling noise arises from the forced
elongation of the phalanges, and consequently from the separation of
their articular surfaces, as well as from the flexion.

The increase of the fluid of the tendinous synovial membranes forms
a species of dropsy which is called ganglion, a tumour which never
exists in the synovial membranes of the fingers, no doubt on account
of the want of extensibility of the fibrous capsules. It should not
be thought however that all these tumours, which are cured by bursting
them by strong pressure and thus effusing the fluid into the cellular
membrane, have for their base a natural synovial membrane. Most
frequently they are preternatural; they are cysts which are formed in
the cellular texture. In fact these tumours are often found in the
course of the great extensor of the thumb, where there is no synovial
membrane. After rheumatic pains I have seen a considerable collection
of fluid in the small synovial membrane of the tendo Achillis; it
gradually disappeared. I have observed another analogous one in the
bag of the psoas of a dead body. The fluid was reddish and of the
consistence of currant jelly. The action of nitric acid immediately
coagulated it into a white mass, analogous to the white of an egg
hardened.

The adhering surface of the tendinous synovial membranes is spread,
1st, on the one hand upon the tendons, with which it is more or less
intimately united. It is easily detached from those of the internal
obturator, the psoas, &c. It is closely connected with those of the
flexors. 2d. On the other hand, it commonly lines the periosteum,
which, in this place, is penetrated with gelatine, and forms a
fibro-cartilage. Its mode of relation is there analogous to that of the
articular synovial membrane with the cartilage of the bone. Sometimes
it is reflected upon a fibrous capsule after having lined the tendon;
such are those which are in the neighbourhood of the scapulo-humeral
articulation. In some cases, after having lined the tendon, they
mount up to the fleshy fibres, as on the obturator internus. 3d. By
reflecting from the tendon upon the neighbouring organs, they answer
in general instead of much cellular texture; but in the grooves of the
flexors, it is the fibrous sheaths which they clothe.

In all the great motions, the tendinous synovial membranes, stretched
more or less, undergo various locomotions, always less however than
those of the serous surfaces.

The very various forms, which the sac without opening of the
tendinous synovial membranes exhibits, can be reduced to two general
modifications. 1st. Some are rounded sacs, species of bladders; such
are those upon the supra-spinatus, the psoas, iliacus, obturator
internus, &c. All these membranes are remarkable for this, that they
never cover the tendon entirely, but only on one side; that they never
form internal folds and that they are never surrounded by fibrous
sheaths. 2d. The others, belonging especially to the flexors, and to
the different tendons which traverse the sole of the foot, form at
first a kind of cylindrical sac which lines the canal half fibrous,
half cartilaginous in which the tendon slips; then they are reflected
around it, cover it wholly and form for it a true sheath which prevents
it from being moistened by the synovia. This kind of tendinous synovial
membrane represents then truly two canals, at the superior and inferior
extremities of which are found two cul-de-sacs which unite them and
complete the sac without an opening. Internal folds are here frequently
found going from one canal to the other. All the synovial membranes of
the flexors have one of them under the tendon.


_Organization; Properties; Development._

The organization of the tendinous synovial membranes is precisely
analogous to that of the articular ones. Principally cellular, the
texture of these membranes is without any apparent fibre; its softness
is very evident; very few blood vessels are distributed to it, though
the contrary has been said; absorbents and exhalants especially
predominate in it. These, filled with blood in inflammation, give to
the membrane, a reddish tinge, more or less deep. In this state the
synovia is not exhaled; sometimes even adhesions are formed, as I have
observed in a subject in whom the fibrous sheaths and their tendons of
the index and the middle finger seemed to be united. The inflammatory
phenomena of the tendinous synovial membranes are especially remarkable
in whitlows, a disease, one species of which has evidently its seat in
the synovial membrane of the fingers, is analogous to the inflammation
of the pleura, the peritoneum, and to that of the articulations. It is
more dangerous than the inflammation of the synovial membranes in the
form of bladders or bags, because the fibrous sheath which surrounds
the inflamed membrane, not being able to stretch and yield to the
swelling, like the cellular texture which surrounds the synovial bags,
produces real strangulations, which it is often necessary to remove. I
do not know whether the synovial texture of the tendons is exposed to
the slow and tubercular inflammations, common to the articular serous
and synovial systems. Its vital properties and those of texture appear
to be precisely the same as those of this last. Like it, it receives
with difficulty the sympathetic influence of the other organs; it
is unaffected during the derangement of the other systems in acute
diseases; it remains sound in their alterations arising from chronic
affections. I would observe also that all its affections are almost
local. For example, there is not, as in the serous system, species of
dropsical diathesis, that is to say of cases in which all the synovial
sacs are filled at the same time.

The tendinous synovial membranes, fine and delicate in the fœtus and in
infancy, readily yield to the numerous motions which constantly succeed
that age. More dense and compact in the adult, they become rigid in old
age, exhale less fluid, are dry, and do not contribute a little, by the
state in which they are, to the general slowness of the motions which
that age brings with it.

There are many synovial membranes the existence of which is variable;
such as, for example, that of the great glutæus, in the place of which
there is often found only a cellular mass. These membranes are in
general very dry when they exist. Synovia can scarcely be discovered in
them. They resemble in this respect the articular synovial membranes of
the vertebræ, the clavicle, &c.




GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


This system, one of the most important in the animal economy, differs
from most others in this, that the texture which is peculiar to it is
not precisely the same in all the organs that compose it. The fibres
of a muscle of animal life would as well serve for the structure
of any other muscle of the same system. The tendinous fibres, the
cartilaginous, osseous textures, &c. are everywhere the same. On the
contrary, the texture of the liver would not serve to compose the
kidney, nor that of this last the salivary glands. The glandular system
then has a resemblance in its different parts only by certain general
attributes which have many exceptions.

Authors have given the name of glands to organs to which it does not
belong; such as the thyroid, the pineal, the lymphatic glands, those
especially that are in the neighbourhood of the bronchia, the thymus,
the suprarenal, &c. We should call by this name only a body from which
flows, by one or many ducts, a fluid which this body separates from
the blood which it receives by the vessels that go to it. 1st. On the
head, the salivary, the lachrymal, the Meibomian and the ceruminous
glands of the ear, and the amygdalæ.; 2d, the mammæ on the thorax; 3d,
in the abdomen, the liver, the pancreas and the kidneys; 4th, in the
pelvis, the prostate and the testicles; 5th, on the whole trunk and the
face, the very numerous collection of mucous glands; these are nearly
all that are dependant upon the glandular system; all the other organs
which belong to it by this name, are foreign to it in their texture,
their properties, their life and their functions. In this point of
view, the division of Vicq d’Azyr is inaccurate.

The extremities contain nothing which belong to this system, no
doubt because the fluids which it separates almost all serve for the
functions of organic life, whilst in the extremities every thing is in
relation to animal functions.


ARTICLE FIRST.

SITUATION, FORMS, DIVISION, &C. OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.

The glands have two different positions. Some of them are
sub-cutaneous, as the mammæ, the salivary glands, &c.; the others
deep seated, as the liver, the kidneys, the pancreas and almost all
the mucous ones are removed from the action of external bodies. The
greatest number occupy places where there is constantly much motion,
as the salivary glands on account of the jaw, the mucous on account of
the neighbouring fleshy layer, the liver on account of the diaphragm,
&c. It is this which has made it believed that this motion, foreign
to their functions, was destined to produce the excretion of their
fluids. But, 1st, the glands of the palatine arch, the pancreas,
the testicles, the kidneys even, can hardly borrow accessory aid on
account of their position. 2d. We know that the sight alone of grateful
food makes the saliva flow. 3d. Sialagogues produce the same effect.
4th. When the bladder is paralytic, the mucous juices pour into it as
before, oftentimes more copiously. 5th. The semen flows involuntarily.
6th. The excretion of the mucous juices is as easy in the pituitary
membrane as any where else, though the fleshy layer, almost everywhere
spread under the mucous system, is wholly wanting here. A thousand
other analogous facts prove this truth placed beyond a doubt by Bordeu,
viz. that the vital action is the essential cause of every excretion.

Accessory aid should not however be entirely rejected. In fact, in
salivary fistulas, there is evidently more fluid thrown out during
mastication than at any other time. It is evident that in the excretion
of urine, the abdominal muscles perform the principal part. When the
gall-bladder is emptied, I believe that the neighbouring motions are
much assistance to it. In general, whenever the fluids are found in
considerable quantities, if the parietes of the organs which contain
them are not very strong, like those of the heart, the motions of the
neighbouring organs are necessary to overcome the resistance which they
offer. On the contrary, in the capillary vessels in which the fluids
are in small quantities, the organ that contains them is sufficient, by
its reaction, for the motion.

There are single glands like the liver, the pancreas, &c.; and others
in pairs, as the kidneys, the salivary, lachrymal glands, &c. These
resemble each other in general on both sides; but their resemblance
is not to be compared for precision to that of the organs in pairs
of animal life. One of the kidneys is lower than the other; their
arteries, veins and nerves are not analogous either in length or size;
frequently fissures exist in one that are wanting in the other, &c.
The same observation is true with respect to the salivary glands.

The glandular forms are not fixed and invariable; they exhibit
a thousand different modifications in their size, direction and
proportions; they have never the precise and exact conformation of the
organs of animal life. This fact can be disputed by no one who has
examined a number of dead bodies. The following are the means by which
I have made this most evident to myself. We know that the organs vary
much in size, in different individuals; now, in these varieties the
proportions are always accurately kept in animal life, whilst it is
rare that they are so in organic life. Let us take an organ for example
in each of the two lives. I have always seen that in a small brain the
corpus callosum, the thalami nervorum opticorum, the corpora striata,
&c. are in proportion to the whole size of the organ. On the contrary,
nothing is more common than to see a large lobe of Spigelius with a
small liver, and vice versa a large liver with a small lobe. There is
no anatomist who has not had frequent occasion to make this remarkable
observation. A kidney is larger sometimes in its superior part,
sometimes in its inferior, &c. It is in the whole of the organ that
these varieties of size take place in animal life; it is oftentimes in
insulated parts only in organic life. The reason of this appears to me
to be that the harmony of action is necessary, as I have demonstrated,
for the animal functions; so that if one side of the brain is more
developed than the other, if one eye, one ear, one pituitary membrane,
&c. are more developed than their corresponding organs, the perception,
the sight, the hearing, the smell, &c. would be inevitably deranged;
whilst the secretion of bile, of urine, &c. takes place equally well,
though one part of these glands may be larger or smaller than the other
parts.

There is a remark to be made respecting the glands with regard to these
varieties of form, it is, that those which are covered by a membrane,
as the liver, the kidneys, even the pancreas, are less exposed to
them than those which are buried in cellular texture without having
around them a membranous covering, as the salivary, the lachrymal, the
mucous glands, &c. I have often examined these last in the mouth and in
the course of the trachea; I never found them alike in two subjects.
We know that the parotid sometimes extends upon the masseter, and
sometimes does not, that it descends more or less into the neck, that
it is of a greater or less size there, &c.

When one gland of a pair is wanting or becomes diseased, sometimes the
other increases considerably in size, as I have seen in the kidneys.
This takes place also in the treatment by compression of salivary
fistulas, a treatment which does not however always succeed. In other
cases, the sound gland increases its action and secretes more fluid,
without increasing in size.

The exterior of the glands not covered by membranes is unequal and
lobulated; it conforms to the muscles, the vessels, the nerves, and
even the bones, as the parotid which is placed under the angle of the
jaw. Less cellular texture is in general found around them, than around
organs with great motion. That which is in contact with them is more
dense and compact than that of the organic interstices. It closely
resembles the sub-mucous texture, that exterior to the arteries, the
veins, the excretories, &c. but it is not however so resisting. It
receives fat with difficulty, and forms a kind of membrane, which,
insulating to a certain extent the vitality of the gland, performs in
great measure in this respect the functions of the peritoneum around
the liver, of the peculiar membrane of the kidneys, the spleen, &c.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization of this System._

The glandular texture is distinct from most of the others in this, that
the fibrous arrangement is wholly foreign to it. The elements that
compose it are not placed at the side of each other, in longitudinal or
oblique lines, as in the muscles, the fibrous bodies, the bones, the
nerves, &c. They are found agglomerated, united by cellular texture,
and adhere but very slightly. Thus whilst the organs with distinct
fibres resist much, especially in the direction of their fibres,
these are torn with the least effort, and break even with ease. Their
rupture is unequal, full of prominences and depressions, a difference
which distinguishes them from cartilage, the rupture of which is in
general smooth. This rupture is not equally easy in all the glands.
The prostate, the amygdalæ, the mucous glands resist much more than
the liver or the kidneys, which principally exhibit this phenomenon.
The pancreas and salivary glands yield a little without breaking, when
they are pulled; but it is not their texture which is the seat of this
phenomenon, it is the abundant cellular texture that penetrates them;
thus their different lobes are then separated, in proportion as the
filaments which are between them become longer.

The glandular texture, which is very commonly called parenchyma, is in
general arranged in three different ways. 1st. In the pancreas, the
salivary and lachrymal glands, there are distinct lobes, separated by
cellular texture, resulting from smaller lobes which are agglomerated
together and which are composed of still less lobes, that are called
glandular grains; the scalpel traces with ease the first, second, third
and even fourth divisions. 2d. In the liver and the kidneys there is
found no trace of the first of these divisions, of those into principal
and even secondary lobes. The glandular grains all in juxta-position,
having between them an equal quantity of cellular texture, a quantity
which is very small, as we shall see, present an uniform texture
without inequality, which is broken with ease, as I have said, and the
rupture of which exhibits species of granulations. 3d. The prostate,
the amygdalæ and all the mucous glands have a soft parenchyma, like
pulp, without the appearance of principal or secondary lobes, or
even glandular grains, not breaking, yielding much more under the
finger that compresses it, than that of the other glands. The simple
inspection of the glandular system is sufficient to enable any one to
perceive the triple difference which I have just pointed out, and which
is essential. The testicles and the mammæ have a peculiar texture which
cannot be referred to these differences.

Authors have been much occupied with the intimate structure of the
glands. Malpighi admitted that there were small bodies in them, which
he believed were formed of a peculiar nature. Ruysch determined that
they were all vascular. Let us neglect all these idle questions, in
which neither inspection nor experiment can guide us. Let us begin to
study anatomy where the organs can be subjected to our senses. The
exact progress of the sciences in this age is not accommodated to all
these hypotheses, which made general anatomy and physiology but a
frivolous romance in the last.

There is no doubt that the excretories communicate with the arteries
which penetrate the glands. Injections made in these escape with great
ease by the first, without there being any trace of extravasation
in the gland. The blood flows often naturally by the excretories,
and produces sometimes bloody urine, saliva, &c. But do these facts
prove that there are only vessels in the glands, that the peculiar
parenchyma of which they are the result does not depend on a substance
which is peculiar to them? The glands, like all the other organs, as
the muscles, the bones, the mucous membranes, &c. have their peculiar
texture which especially characterizes them, which belongs only to
them, a texture in which the arteries communicate with the veins and
the excretories. Let us not push our researches further; if we do, we
shall be inevitably entangled in conjectures. Let us confine ourselves
to examining what phenomena distinguish this texture from all the
others when subjected to the different reagents. It is much to know
the characteristic attributes of the glandular system, without seeking
to understand its intimate nature, which, like that of all the other
systems, is concealed by an impenetrable veil.

The glandular parenchyma dried in the air after having been cut in
slices, loses its original colour, takes a deep one, black even in the
liver and the kidneys, in which it is owing especially to the blood
which penetrates these glands, since if they are dried after having
been deprived of it by repeated washing, they remain grey after their
drying. No system becomes harder or more brittle than this by this
preparation. It diminishes then less in size than most of the others.
When immersed in water after being thus dried, it becomes soft, resumes
in part its original appearance and its tendency to putrefaction, which
takes place immediately if it is left in the open air.

The glandular texture, when exposed to the air so that it does not dry,
becomes putrid very quickly, and gives out an odour more fetid than
most of the others. More ammonia appears to be disengaged from it. The
liver especially produces an insupportable odour when putrid. I do not
know any organ, kept in a vessel full of water to macerate, which gives
out more disagreeable emanations. The kidney becomes putrid much less
quickly; this varies however a little.

When boiled, the glandular texture furnishes in the first moments of
ebullition, a great quantity of grey substance, which mixes at first
perfectly with the water which it renders turbid and then collects
into a copious scum on the top of this fluid. It is this texture,
the fleshy, the mucous and the cellular which give the most scum in
boiling, as it is the cartilaginous, the tendinous, the aponeurotic,
the fibro-cartilaginous, &c. which give the least of it. It should not
be believed, moreover, that this first product of stewing is uniform in
its nature; it varies in each system in quality as well as quantity. At
least I have observed that its appearance is never the same, that it
has nothing constant but its frothy state, which also varies much and
which is even almost always nothing in the mucous system.

The liquor which results from the boiling is very much changed in
colour, and appears to contain many more principles than that made with
the white organs. An accurate analysis of the liquor in which each
system had been boiled would be an interesting subject of research. I
have found that in almost all the appearance, the taste and the colour
were different.

The glands exhibit a phenomenon when cooking that especially
distinguishes them. They harden at the moment of the first ebullition,
and acquire the horny hardness like all the other systems; but whilst
most of these soften again from long-continued stewing, so as to become
pulpy, the glands uniformly become harder, so that after five or six
hours boiling, they are three or four times as hard as they naturally
are. I have very often made this experiment, which is also well known
in our kitchens, in which when a gland is cooked, care is taken that
the stewing should not continue too long. Beef kidney finally becomes
soft; those of sheep and of man remain hard for a much longer time.
They soften however more than the texture of the liver, which is of all
the glands that which exhibits the hardness in the greatest degree.

Another phenomenon which especially distinguishes the ebullition of
the glandular system, is that when it is taken out at the moment
it has undergone the sudden horny hardening, common to almost all
the animal solids plunged into boiling water, it has not like the
others acquired elasticity. Draw in an opposite direction a tendon, a
serous or mucous membrane or a muscle that have undergone the horny
hardening, they stretch and afterwards suddenly contract the instant
the extension ceases; on the contrary, a slice of liver that has the
horny hardness breaks when it is drawn and never contracts. The texture
of the prostate appears to be more capable of then acquiring a little
elasticity. The non-fibrous disposition of the glands seems to have
much influence upon this phenomenon.

Exposed to the sudden action of a very bright fire as in roasting,
the texture of the liver and the other glands crisps and contracts on
the exterior. There results from it on the surface a kind of covering
impermeable in part to the juices contained in the organ, which in this
way becomes cooked in these juices which soften it in the interior.
This phenomenon is however common to all the solids. Hence why care is
taken to expose what is roasting, whether it be muscular or glandular,
at first to the action of a very quick fire; afterwards when the horny
hardening of the surface has been produced, it is diminished, and the
organ is cooked with a small fire.

The glands macerated in water yield differently to its action. The
liver resists it longer than the kidney, which after an experiment
of two months made in vessels placed in a cellar has been reduced to
a reddish jelly swimming in the water; whilst the first preserved
for the same time and a little longer, its form and density, and had
only changed its red colour to a blueish brown, whereas the kidney
retains its colour in maceration. The salivary glands contain much of
this white, unctuous and hard substance, which all the cellular parts
when long macerated exhibit. It is not the glandular texture that has
changed, but only the fat contained in the cellular texture, which is
here very abundant.

The acids act upon the glandular texture nearly the same as upon all
the others. They reduce them to a pulp which varies in its colour and
the rapidity of its formation, according to the acid employed. The
sulphuric is uniformly the most efficacious in producing this pulp
which it blackens, whilst the nitric yellows it. All the acids act with
much more difficulty upon the glandular texture when stewed, than when
raw. My experiments have convinced me that but few systems exhibit this
difference in a more remarkable manner.

The glands are much less digestible than many other animal substances,
especially when stewed, which produces in them in this respect an
effect entirely different from what it does in the cartilages, the
tendons, and all the fibrous organs, which by it lose their density,
become soft, gelatinous, viscid even and are easier dissolved by the
gastric juice. I believe in general that we should digest the glands
much easier by eating them raw. Every one knows that the more the liver
is cooked, the more indigestible it becomes. This induced me to make a
comparative experiment upon this organ cooked and raw; when one portion
in the second state was reduced to a pulp in the stomach of a dog, the
other portion in the first state swallowed at the same time had just
begun to be altered.


_Of the Excretories, of their Origin, of their Divisions, &c. Of the
Glandular Reservoirs._

All the glands have ducts destined to carry off the fluid which they
secrete from the mass of blood; now as they are only found in the
glands, they should be considered with the peculiar texture of these
organs. The origin of these ducts is uniform in all the glands. They
arise, like the veins, by an infinite number of capillaries, which form
the last ramifications of a kind of tree, these ramifications appear to
begin at each glandular grain, where these grains exist; so that for
each there is one of these, an artery and a vein. Arising thus from the
whole of the interior of the gland, these ducts soon unite and form
larger ducts, which usually go in a straight line though the glandular
texture, converge towards each other, unite with other ducts still
larger and terminate differently.

In respect to this termination, glands should be divided into three
classes. 1st. Some transmit their fluids by many ducts, each of which
is the assemblage of smaller ducts, opening at the side of each other,
but all entirely distinct and without communication. Sometimes at
the place where these ducts terminate, a more or less considerable
prominence is observed, as on the breast, as also on the prostate,
of which the verumontanum is a kind of nipple. Sometimes there is
a depression, a sort of cul-de-sac which is found at the place of
these orifices, as in the amygdalæ, upon the tongue, &c. Sometimes
the surface on which the different ducts of a gland open, is smooth
and even, as is the case with that on which those of the lachrymal,
sublingual and almost all the mucous glands open. 2d. Other glands
pour out their fluid by a single duct, as the parotids, the pancreas,
the sublinguals, &c.; this arrangement is only a modification of the
preceding; where the duct opens, no inequality is usually discovered,
the surface is smooth. 3d. There are glands which, before throwing
out their fluid by their excretories, deposit it for some time in a
reservoir where it remains to be afterwards expelled; such as the
kidneys, the liver, the testicles, &c. Here there are always two
excretories, one which goes from the gland to the reservoir, the other
from the reservoir outwards. These reservoirs are evidently a part of
the same system to which their excretory ducts belong.

Though the first and second species of glands have no reservoir, yet
the different ramifications of their excretories may to a certain
extent be considered as such. In fact, these ramifications, as well as
those of the excretories of the glands with a reservoir, are constantly
full of the fluid which is secreted in these organs. Whatever may have
been the kind of death, the fluid of the prostate may be always made
to ooze out, by compressing the gland; I have often even by pressure
produced a very evident jet. The papillæ of the kidney also uniformly
give out urine when pressed. The liver cut in slices allows natural
bile to escape from the divisions of the hepatic duct. The semen is
uniformly found in the windings of the vas deferens. The lactiferous
vessels keep the milk in their cavity, till it is evacuated, and it has
even no other reservoir. The greater or less size of the mammæ during
lactation is owing to the greater or less fulness of these vessels. It
is also to this circumstance that must be referred the peculiar taste
of each glandular texture, which always borrows some sapid particles
from the fluid it secretes. We know that the kidney has always an
urinous odour, especially in old animals. It is to this also that I
refer the difference of putrefaction which I have observed between
this organ and the liver. We know that the bile undergoes putrid
fermentation sooner than the urine; this, when it is very acid, can
even preserve it to a certain extent from putrefaction; expose then
the liver and the kidney to it, the latter will almost always be the
last to become putrid, as I have said.

It appears in general that the course of the fluids in the excretories
is much less rapid than that of the blood in the veins and even than
that of the lymph in the absorbents; the following considerations place
this beyond a doubt. The urine flows continually by the ureters, as is
evidently proved by fistulas in the loins; now, in the time taken to
fill the bladder by this uninterrupted flowing, there would flow from a
vein of a diameter equal to that of the ureter ten times as much blood,
and much more lymph from the thoracic duct. Yet this rapidity of motion
is subject to many varieties; during the period of inactivity of the
glands, it is not half as great as during their activity; the salivary
fistulas are a proof of this. We know how promptly the ureters transmit
the urine from the drinks that are taken.


_Size, Direction and Termination of the Excretories._

The size of the excretories varies. 1st. Those which go out in
considerable number from a gland are very small, often hardly
perceptible. They commonly run their course in a straight line, do not
anastomose with each other and open immediately upon going out of the
gland. 2d. Those that are single are larger, always in proportion to
the size of their gland, except however the hepatic which is evidently
very small in comparison with the liver. They run their course out of
their glands, and arise from ducts as large as those of the preceding
ones; so that if a single trunk arose from the excretories of these,
they would resemble the others in every respect. They differ only in
this, that their secondary excretories open directly on their surface,
whereas they unite in a common trunk in the others. The pancreas is
the only one in which this common trunk goes concealed in the gland
itself. It is only in the testicles that it is tortuous, and in which,
on this account, it is longer than the course which it has to run.

Whatever may be their arrangement, the excretories pour all their fluid
either on the exterior, as the urethra, and ureters, the lactiferous
tubes, and the ducts of the sebaceous glands; or on the interior of the
mucous membranes, as the mucous, salivary, pancreatic, prostate and
hepatic excretories. The cutaneous and mucous surfaces are the only
ones then on which the excretories terminate, the only ones which their
fluids moisten. These ducts are never seen opening upon the serous or
synovial surfaces. The excretories of the pretended articular glands
would be, if they existed, an exception to the laws of the general
organization. The excretories never open in the cellular texture; if
this happens preternaturally, either abscesses take place from the
irritation which results from it, as in urinary fistulas, or a callus
forms in the course of the excreted fluid, and thus defend the cellular
system from a troublesome infiltration.

Hence the mucous tube of the intestines should be considered as a kind
of general excretory added to the pancreatic, hepatic excretories,
&c. and which throws out all the fluids which are separately poured
by these ducts into it. In fact, all the secreted fluids appear to be
destined, as I have said, to be thrown out of the body. Separated from
the mass of blood, they are foreign to it, and do not enter it in a
natural state. Though still contained in cavities with mucous surfaces,
they may be truly considered as being out of our parts. These surfaces
are really true internal integuments, destined to defend the organs
from the contact of the substances which they contain, a contact which
would inevitably be injurious to them.


_Remarks on the Secreted Fluids._

The fact that the secreted fluids are destined to be thrown out, a
fact which is incontestable with regard to the urine, the bile which
colours the excrements, the saliva, &c. has made me for a long time
believe that the introduction of these fluids into the sanguineous
system, would produce the most serious consequences. I was besides
confirmed in this, 1st, by my experiments, in which I have always seen,
as I have said, the urine, the bile, &c. injected into the cellular
texture, remain without being absorbed, but producing abscesses; 2d,
by the infiltration of the urine in the neighbourhood of the bladder,
from which abscesses always arise; 3d, by the serious consequences
from the effusions of this fluid in the peritoneum from the high
operation for the stone, and of the bile on the same surface in certain
penetrating wounds, in both these cases these fluids never re-enter
the blood by way of absorption, like the peritoneal serum, but almost
always occasion death; 4th, by an experiment in which I had seen a dog
die shortly after the injection of urine into the jugular. All these
considerations made me suspect that the secreted fluids, introduced
again into the mass of blood, were always fatal at the end of some
time, and that, as some physicians whose opinion is of great weight
have thought, all that has been said of the bile’s being poured into
the blood in bilious diseases, is but a consequence of vague ideas of
the reality of which there is no proof. Yet the importance of this
question, in regard to medical theories, has induced me to resolve it
by experiments, so as to leave no doubt upon the subject.

I have then injected into the jugular veins of many dogs bile taken
from the gall-bladder of other dogs which I opened at the same time.
For the first few days they appeared to be weary, did not eat, were
much altered, their eyes were heavy, and they were constantly lying
down; but after some time they gradually regained their former vigour.
I afterwards employed human bile in these experiments; the result was
the same, except that many times, the animal had hiccough and vomiting
some time after the injection. In one instance a dog died in three
hours after the experiment; but it was because I made use of that
extremely black fluid that is sometimes found in the gall-bladder
instead of bile which resembles thick ink, and which appears to form a
considerable part of those black vomitings that sometimes take place.

These experiments induced me to try some with the saliva, and I
obtained the same result from them; only the languid state that
succeeded the injection was less evident. I afterwards made use of
nasal mucus suspended in a sufficient quantity of water, for it
can hardly be dissolved in it. Finally urine itself was many times
injected, not that which comes immediately from drink and is only
aqueous, but that which is of slow formation. In this experiment the
dogs have been sicker, but only one died, and that happened on the
seventh day. I have many times repeated it, on account of that which
I performed three years ago; the same result has always taken place,
which makes me think that being but little used at that time to make
experiments, I introduced by accident a bubble of air through the
syringe, which is sufficient to produce the death of the animal.

A question then is evidently settled by the experiment. The secreted
fluids, though destined to be thrown out in the natural state, can
re-enter the circulation, without causing the death of the animal,
which is only more or less affected according to the nature of the
fluid injected. Whether the bile circulates or not with the blood in
bilious fevers, I have not examined; but it certainly can circulate
with it after having been absorbed in its canals. I do not doubt
but that in purulent reabsorptions, the pus circulates in its
natural state in the sanguineous system; I confess that I have not
made experiments upon the injection of this fluid, but I intend to
immediately.

We exaggerate every thing. No doubt the solids in which the vital
forces are especially inherent, are particularly affected in diseases;
but why should not the fluids be affected also? Why should we not seek
in them causes of disease as well as in the solids?

There are cases in which these are primarily affected, and in which the
fluids are so in consequence; thus in cancer, in the affections of the
liver, the spleen, &c. in most organic lesions, the various yellowish,
grey, brown and even greenish shades of the face, are an index of the
consecutive alterations which the fluids experience in their colour and
consequently in their nature.

In other cases the affection commences with them; as when the venom of
the viper is introduced into the blood, as when reabsorption of pus
takes place from external abscesses, or in phthisis, and as when there
is absorption of various contagious principles. There is no doubt that
the different substances which can be introduced with the chyle into
the blood, may be the cause of various diseases. Is it not the blood
which carries to the brain the narcotic principles which produce sleep?
does it not carry turpentine and cantharides to the kidneys, mercury to
the salivary glands, &c.? Inject opium, wine, &c. into the veins, and
you will stupify the animal the same as if you had given them by the
stomach.

Physiologists at one time were much engaged with the introduction of
medicinal infusions into the veins of living animals. They circulated
by these infusions purgatives, emetics and a thousand other foreign
substances, the contact of which the blood bore, without occasioning
any other accident to the animal than that of vomiting or alvine
evacuations if they were emetics or purgatives, and a greater or less
general derangement if they were other foreign substances which had no
affinity with any particular organ.

The caustics, as the nitric and sulphuric acids and other very
irritating substances, have alone caused death in these curious
experiments of which Haller has given us a sketch, and which prove that
various substances wholly foreign to the blood can circulate in it, and
that it is a common mass in which are found many principles differing
from each other, and which cannot be always essentially the same. In
these experiments the most important part has been neglected, that of
the infusion of the different animal fluids, particularly the secreted
ones, and those also which are preternaturally produced in diseases. I
think that the different reabsorptions would be much elucidated by the
infusion of the various kinds of pus, sanies, &c. But we have already
sufficient facts to convince us that the fluids and especially the
blood can be diseased; that the various foreign substances mixed with
it can act in a fatal manner upon the solids. In fact, every acrid,
irritating matter, without being mortal, accelerates the action of the
heart and produces a true fever, if injected into the veins. In all
these cases, it is always necessary that the solids should act; for
all the morbid phenomena suppose their alterations; but the principle
of these alterations is in the fluids. They are the excitants, and the
solids the organs excited. Now if there are no excitants, there is no
excitement, and the solids remain unaffected.

Finally there are cases in which the whole economy both solids and
fluids seem to be simultaneously affected; such are adynamic fevers,
in which at the same time that there is a general prostration of the
first, the second appear to be really decomposed.

Let us not exaggerate then medical theories; let us regard nature in
diseases as she is in a state of health, in which the solids elaborate
the fluids and are at the same time excited by them. There is a
reciprocal action, every thing succeeds each other, every thing is
connected together. Our abstractions hardly ever exist in nature. We
usually adopt a certain number of general principles in medicine, and
we accustom ourselves afterwards to deduce from these principles, as
necessary consequences, all the explanations of diseases. There is in
physical phenomena a regularity and uniformity which never deceive. In
morals even, there is a certain number of principles acknowledged by
all men, which direct them and regulate their actions; hence a constant
uniformity in our manner of considering moral and physical phenomena;
hence the habit of going always from the same principles in reasoning
upon them. We have carried this habit into the study of the living
economy, without considering that it incessantly varies its phenomena,
that under the same circumstances they are hardly ever the same, that
they are continually increased and diminished and have a thousand
different modifications. Nature seems at every instant to be irregular,
capricious and inconsequent in their production, because the essence of
the laws which preside over these phenomena, is not the same as that of
the physical laws.

I would observe that the experiments the result of which I have just
given for the secreted fluids, differ from those which I published
the last year, and in which these fluids have always been fatal, the
instant they were forced towards the brain by the carotid. This is a
phenomenon general to all the irritating fluids, whether drawn from the
economy, or foreign to it; they destroy life when they arrive at the
cerebral organ, by a direct injection and without having undergone any
alteration, whilst we can inject them with impunity into the veins,
as the experiments of the physicians of the last age have proved. We
can even without danger, as I have observed, introduce them into the
arterial system, on the side opposite to the brain, as in the crural
artery, for example. Do the fluids mixed with the black blood rid
themselves of some principles by respiration, before they arrive at the
brain, or is the preceding phenomenon owing to other causes? I know
not. I would only observe that every thing which is not arterial blood,
as the black blood and even serum, produces death when forced into the
carotid. Water alone is injected with impunity. When the irritating
principles are much diluted in this fluid, their contact is less
injurious. I have seen very light coloured urine not produce death.


_Structure of the Excretories._

All the excretories have an internal membrane which is mucous, and
which is a continuation of the mucous or cutaneous surfaces, upon which
they terminate. But besides this, they all exhibit an external covering
which forms the shell, as it were, of this mucous canal. This shell
is very thick in the vas deferens, in which it exhibits a texture but
little known. In the urethra it is of a spongy nature, containing much
blood and analogous to the glans of which it is a continuation. In the
ureters, in the hepatic, salivary ducts, &c. it is this extremely dense
and compact cellular texture of which we have spoken, which, by its
structure, resembles that of the arterial and venous cellular texture,
and which differs essentially from the ordinary cellular texture, as
from the intermuscular. It does not appear that there is in these ducts
a membrane differing from this dense texture and the mucous surface.

Each excretory has its vessels. The ureters evidently receive branches
from the renal, spermatic arteries, &c. &c. The hepatic gives them to
the ductus choledochus; the transverse artery of the face supplies
the duct of Steno. Various nerves coming from the ganglions accompany
the corresponding arteries and veins. Yet I have uniformly observed
that there is never around these ducts a plexus as evident as there is
around most of the arteries.

The excretories have principally the vital properties of the mucous
system which forms them in great part. Their sympathies are also nearly
of the same nature.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Glandular System. Cellular
Texture._

The glands differ much in the cellular texture which enters into their
structure. We may even, in this respect, divide them into two classes.

In all the salivary glands, in the lachrymal, in the pancreas, in all
the glands with a granulated and white parenchyma, it is very abundant.
Each glandular body is divided into lobes very distinctly separated
by grooves which this texture fills, and which produce the lobulated
appearance on the exterior of this species of gland; not only each
lobe, but each lobule, each glandular grain even, has also the cellular
texture for a boundary. In this respect, this sort of gland is truly
an assemblage of small distinct bodies, which, separated from each
other, would also perform well their functions. This is what is seen
in the parotids, in which different accessory glands are often found
in the course of the duct of Steno, and are perfectly independent of
the principal gland. Sometimes there is a continuity, sometimes there
is a separation between the sub-maxillary and the sub-lingual glands.
The cellular texture is often loaded with much fat in this species of
gland. This is especially remarkable in the mammæ, the size of which is
owing sometimes to the glandular texture, as in young people in whom
this texture predominates over the fat; sometimes to the predominance
of this fat, as we see after the fortieth year, when this gland
preserves a considerable size. The difference is easily perceived by
the touch by the softness and flaccidity of the organ in the second
case, and by its resistance and firmness in the first. In the age of
puberty often, it is also the fatty cellular texture which increases
the size of this organ. Hence why there is often but little milk from
a large breast, and a much greater quantity from a smaller one. In the
voluptuous sensations which we experience at the sight of this organ,
we distinguish very well, without being conscious of it, the breast
whose prominence is real, from that which is not, and in which the fat
only raises the skin of the breast. It is rare in the salivary glands,
the pancreas, &c. that the cellular texture predominates so much, that
the fat accumulates in them in so considerable a quantity. I have
however seen cases in which the parotid resembled a fatty muscle; but
there was no increase of size.

In the testicle, whose parenchymatous portions are separated as in the
preceding glands, the cellular texture is not the medium of union.
There is found between each grain species of threads which appear to be
excretories, and not real cellular laminæ.

In the glands with a compact parenchyma, as the liver, the kidney, the
prostate, the mucous glands, &c. &c. there is very little cellular
texture; by tearing them in different directions, they break without
exhibiting intermediate laminæ. Fat is never found accumulated in
their parenchyma. The fatty state of the liver which takes place in
many diseases, and which is not, as has been thought, an affection
necessarily attendant upon phthisis, exhibits a phenomenon wholly
different from the mammæ and the salivary glands when they have become
fatty. The fat enters then like an element into the texture of the
organ; it is in this respect like the colouring substance, whose place
it has as it were taken; it is not found in cells. Moreover much of
it can be extracted by ebullition, and I have observed that much of
it swims on the surface of the water in which livers of this kind are
boiled. The kidney also has fat in its interior; but it is around the
pelvis and not in its peculiar parenchyma. The amygdalæ, the prostate,
the mucous glands, &c. never have it. Serum is never effused into the
texture of the glands with a compact parenchyma. The most complete
leucophlegmasia leaves them sound in this respect.

Yet it cannot be doubted that the cellular texture exists in these
glands; maceration demonstrates it in them. In the fungous tumours
that grow out of them, there is much of it. It is principally around
the vessels that it is found; the capsule of Glisson is an example of
this. It often happens even, as I have been led to observe, that this
texture becomes diseased, whilst that of the gland remains sound. Thus
we see steatomatous tumours developed in the liver, serous cysts in the
kidney, hydatids in both, and various productions in the other glands,
without deranging the secretion in the least. It is upon the liver
especially that these observations are best made; its size is trebled,
even often quadrupled by internal tumours, without an increase of its
texture; this texture dilated forms between these tumours, species of
partitions in which the bile is secreted as usual. The same thing takes
place in the kidney, in which serous cysts are found. Sometimes these
cysts grow there till the whole glandular texture is destroyed, and
there remains only a large sac separated by membranous partitions, and
filled with serum. I have preserved three kidneys of this kind.


_Blood Vessels._

All the glands not covered by a membrane, receive their arteries from
all sides. Numerous branches coming from the neighbouring vessels,
penetrate the whole surface of the pancreas, the salivary and lachrymal
glands, &c. These arteries wind at first in the interstices between
the lobes, ramify afterwards between the smaller lobes and finally
penetrate the glandular grains. Each of them has its own artery;
all communicate together; so that those of the sub-maxillary and the
sub-lingual are filled by injection made by means of small tubes into
the sub-mental, the external maxillary or the lingual, as well as by an
injection of the trunk even of the external carotid.

In the glands surrounded by a membrane, as the liver, the kidney,
the testicle, &c. the arteries enter only at one side, usually in a
fissure, and by a single trunk which is very considerable, and which is
sometimes divided into many branches more or less large. This part of
the gland in which the artery enters is always the most distant from
the action of external bodies, a remark common to all the important
organs, as the lungs, the intestines, the spleen, &c. which always
present externally their convex surface, that on which the vessels are
the most ramified; so that the place where an injury can happen to
them is that where hemorrhage is the least to be feared. The principal
artery, after it has entered the gland, is soon divided into different
branches which separate and are subdivided as they approach the
convexity. They give off in their course many branches to the body of
the gland and then terminate by a great number of capillaries on the
convex part of the gland. They often even pierce the organ and ramify
between it and the membrane which covers it. For example, by injecting
the hepatic artery, if the liver is bare, many small blackish striæ
suddenly appear on its convexity, which are owing to this cause. The
best means of seeing the glandular arterial system, is to inject a
kidney with a solid substance, and afterwards destroy its parenchyma
by maceration or something else. The arterial system is then bare and
entirely by itself. Many of these preparations are found in anatomical
museums.

The great arterial trunks winding in the glands, communicate to them
an internal motion very favourable to their functions. This motion is
so much the more evident, as almost all these organs very near the
heart by their position in the trunk, are, if we may so say, under the
immediate jar of its contractions. The salivary glands, the mucous
ones of the mouth and the lachrymal on the one hand, the testicle,
the prostate and the mucous ones of the genital parts on the other,
exhibit the extremes of this position. Another cause which favours the
jar of the glands by the entrance of the blood, is that almost all
the arteries that go to them run but a very short course before they
enter them. The spermatic alone is an exception to this rule; thus,
every thing in the secretion of semen seems to be characterized by a
remarkable slowness. To this constant motion imparted to the glands by
the entrance of the blood, should be added that which is communicated
to them by the neighbouring organs, and which keeps them in a constant
excitement, which is more necessary to their secretion than to their
excretion. In considering the action of organs, the constant motions
with which they are agitated has been too much neglected. The example
of the brain ought however to fix the attention of physiologists upon
this point.

The veins, everywhere continuous with the arteries, follow the same
distribution in the glandular system, and accompany them almost
everywhere. We do not see superficial and deep-seated veins, as we do
in many other organs. The liver is the only example in which the red
blood enters at one side, and the black goes out at the opposite.

Most of the veins of the glandular system pour their blood into the
general system of black blood, and as many glands are very near the
heart, they feel the reflux which this system often experiences. This
phenomenon is particularly remarkable in the liver, as the hepatic
veins open but very little below the right auricle. Hence why whenever
this auricle is considerably distended, as in asphyxia and in death in
which the lungs being crowded present an obstacle to the blood, the
liver has a much greater quantity than usual. I have uniformly made
this observation. Weigh comparatively this organ when the auricle is
full and when it is empty in the dead body, after having first tied
all its vessels; you will find a very great difference. For the same
reason, you will observe a constant relation between the weight of the
liver and that of the lungs, provided a morbid alteration of texture
of one of them be not the cause of death. The veins of many glands, as
those of the mucous ones of the stomach and the intestines, as those of
the prostate, &c. pour their blood into the system of abdominal black
blood. There are hardly any in the system of which we are treating, but
these veins, those especially of the glands situated in the pelvis,
which become varicose. Varices of the prostate are frequent, as we know.


_Of the Blood of the Glands._

The quantity of blood that is constantly found in the glands varies
remarkably; they may even be divided in this respect into three
classes. 1st. In the pancreas, the salivary, lachrymal glands, &c.
there is found but very little. It does not furnish the colouring
matter to these organs, which are white, and which, when macerated,
tinge with red but two or three waters. 2d. In the mucous glands, the
prostate, the testicles, and the amygdalæ, there is found a little
more. 3d. The liver and the kidneys contain so great a quantity of
it, that there is not in this respect any proportion between them and
the rest of the glandular system. This is owing in a small degree in
the first to the cause pointed out above; thus it often contains more
than the second, but it is not the essential cause. After death by
hemorrhage in which there was no reflux, in the liver or the kidney
suddenly taken from a living animal, &c. we observe the same thing. In
macerating these glands, it is necessary to renew the water at least
a dozen times before it ceases to be bloody. Hence why when they are
preserved in alkohol on account of an organic disease of which they
were the seat, they must be first macerated for a long time; if not,
the liquor soon becomes turbid from the blood. It is this quantity of
blood which gives to these glands a greater weight in proportion than
that of the other parts. It is from this that their redness is derived,
a colour which no other part exhibits to the same degree, but which is
not more strongly inherent in their texture, than it is in the mucous
surfaces or the muscles. In fact, we remove it with the same ease by
repeated washing. Then the liver assumes a greyish appearance, which
appears to be the colour inherent in its texture, as white is that of
the fleshy fibre. The kidney seems a little less to derive its colour
from the blood. It remains in part red when macerated; the pulp even
which is the product of it, after remaining some months in water, that
has been often changed, still exhibits in some degree this colour, much
less however than in a natural state.

Does the state of the secretions make the quantity of the glandular
blood vary? Does more of this fluid enter the kidney when it furnishes
much urine, than when it secretes but little, or if the same quantity
is brought by the arteries, is less returned by the veins in the first
than the second case? This is an interesting subject for experiment.

Is the nature of the blood changed when it arrives at the glands? Has
it a peculiar composition before entering each of them? Much has been
said of this change necessary to secretion; but that this may take
place, there must be a cause to produce it; now what is this cause
here? Does not the blood circulate in the trunks which go to the
glands, as in the others? It would be necessary then that the gland
should be surrounded with an atmosphere which acts upon the blood at
a certain distance from the place where it is; a vague idea, which
has no solid foundation, and which is met with only in the books of
those who have never made experiments. I have drawn blood from the
carotid, spermatic, hepatic and renal arteries; it is equally red and
coagulable. In the same animal, it is impossible for the senses to
discover the least difference.

I would observe that secretion differs essentially from nutrition in
this, that it always draws the materials of its fluids from the red
blood, whereas the second often takes its own from the white fluids, as
we see in the tendons, the cartilages, the hair, &c.


_Nerves._

The glands receive two species of nerves. 1st. The cerebral are found
almost exclusively in the salivary and lachrymal glands, the amygdalæ,
&c. 2d. The testicles, the prostate gland and the liver receive them in
an almost equal proportion from the brain and the ganglions. 3d. The
kidneys and most of the mucous glands receive scarcely any but those
of the ganglions. What is now said of the nerves should be understood
only of those that are free and independent of the arteries; for each
arterial trunk that enters a gland, is surrounded by a nervous net-work
belonging to the system of the ganglions, which is very evident in the
great glands, as in the liver and the kidneys where this net-work comes
from the semilunar ganglion, in the salivary glands where it comes from
the superior cervical, in the testicles where it comes from the lumbar
ganglions, &c.

Compared with the size of the glands, the nerves are in small
proportion, notwithstanding what Bordeu has said. It is not necessary
in fact to judge of this proportion by those of the parotid and
sub-maxillary glands, which merely pass through these glands without
stopping in them, and leave only some branches there. For example,
there is certainly no organ in the economy, among those which receive
nerves, that, in proportion to its size, has so few as the liver.

Besides, the nerves enter the glands nearly in the same way as the
blood-vessels, that is to say, 1st, on all sides, in those that have no
membrane; 2d, by a groove only in those that are covered with one. They
divide and subdivide after entering it, and are soon lost sight of.
Ganglions never exist in the interior of the glands.

Have the nerves an influence upon secretion? It is probable they have,
as every gland is provided with them; but they by no means exert so
immediate an influence upon this function as many physicians have
pretended. 1st. It is said that the nerves of the parotid glands have
been cut, and that the secretion of the saliva has been suppressed.
This division is evidently impossible, since the gland must be
extirpated before removing its nerves. 2d. I have divided the nerves
of the testicle of a dog, the only gland in which this experiment can
be made. I could not obtain any result, because an inflammation of the
gland came on and it suppurated; but this suppuration even supposes
that the nervous influx is not actually necessary for secretion,
since suppuration is accomplished by a mechanism analogous to that of
this function. All physicians know that a paralyzed limb can inflame
and suppurate. 3d. Erection and the ejection of semen take place in
paralysis of the lower half of the body, in which at least the nerves
of the prostate gland are completely paralyzed. Mr. Ivan related to me
the case of a soldier who took gonorrhœa in this state. 4th. We know
that when the bladder is perfectly paralyzed and its nerves have no
longer any action, its mucous glands still continue to secrete their
fluid so as even to produce a catarrh. 5th. The nostril of the affected
side in hemiplegia is as moist as usual. The ear of this side has its
ordinary quantity of wax. 6th. In paralysis of the uvula, the action of
its glands continues. 7th. When the eighth pair of one side of a dog
is cut, the bronchia is found some days after to contain as much mucus
as common. 8th. During the convulsions of the different parts in which
there are glands, and when consequently the nerves of these glands are
more excited, their secretion is not increased. 9th. If we weigh the
proofs given by Bordeu of the influence of the nerves on secretions,
we shall see, that they either rest upon false facts, like those of
the section of the nerve, of sleep, &c. or upon vague data. In general
physicians attach no precise idea to the term _nervous influence_;
the habit of experimenting shows how much they have abused it. When a
nerve being cut, paralyzed or irritated in any manner, the organ which
receives it undergoes no derangement in its functions, we certainly
are unable to appreciate the nervous influence upon this organ. I do
not say that it does not exist, but I maintain that we know nothing
about it, and that we ought not to employ at hazard a word to which
we cannot attach any precise idea. What word will you employ then to
express the influence of the nerves upon the organs of the senses, upon
the voluntary muscles, &c. if the same one is used to express an action
which has no relation with this, and which perhaps even does not exist?


_Exhalants and Absorbents._

This kind of vessels is but little known in the interior of the glands,
where they perform only the purposes of nutrition.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


I. _Properties of Texture._

These properties are in general very inconsiderable in this system,
which appears to me to be particularly owing to its non-fibrous
texture. In fact, in order to be elongated and afterwards contracted
and preserve their integrity, it is necessary that the particles of an
organ should possess a certain degree of adhesion and cohesion; now, it
is to the fibre that especially belongs this double attribute. Observe
also that the glandular system is subjected to much less frequent
causes of distension and contraction, than the systems with distinct
fibres. It is scarcely ever found distended except when purulent
deposits, serous, steatomatous collections, &c. are formed in its
interior, as often happens in the middle of the liver, kidney, &c.; now
in these cases it does not yield like the skin, the muscles, &c.; its
particles are separated; it is the cellular texture with which they are
surrounded that is uniformly dilated; the glandular texture is even
soon destroyed. It is very evident when the collections are formed near
the convexity of the glands; if the tumour be at all large the texture
of the organ disappears; there remains only a cellular and membranous
cyst. Hydatids so frequent on the exterior of the kidneys present us
with examples of it. If it is in the middle of the gland that the
cyst is formed, the destruction also takes place, but it is much less
evident.

A strong proof of the small degree of extensibility of the glands, is
what takes place in the liver in dead bodies. I have said above that
it is more or less loaded with blood, according as the system with
black blood had been more or less embarrassed in the last moments. Now
whatever may be the quantity of blood it contains, its size remains
nearly the same; only its texture is more or less compressed by the
vessels, whilst on the contrary the greater or less size of the lungs,
which is very apparent, always indicates its state of fulness or
vacuity. It is probable even that it is this difference which has made
all physicians neglect the infinitely various states of engorgement
in which the liver may be found at death, whilst they have had a
particular regard to the varieties of the lungs.

The veins of the kidneys, further from the heart, are less exposed than
those of the liver to the reflux that takes place in the last moments
in which the black blood is obstructed in the lungs. Yet it however
takes place, and we see very great varieties in the quantity of blood
in the great renal vessels, a quantity independent of that which is
constantly found in the organ, and which, as I have said, is very
considerable. Now the size of the kidney hardly corresponds to these
varieties, because its extensibility is almost nothing.

As to the glands situated at the two extremities, as on the one
hand the testicles, and on the other the salivary glands, we hardly
observe in them the sanguineous stagnation, because the reflux is not
sufficiently evident. We cannot then, in this way, judge but by analogy
of their extensibility and contractility.

Yet the engorgements of the testicles, consequent upon gonorrhœa,
and the various swellings of the parotid glands prove that these
properties exist to a certain extent. Are the liver, the kidneys and
other internal glands subject to those acute swellings that are often
seen in the sub-cutaneous ones? It is very probable; perhaps even
physicians have not paid sufficient regard to the accessory symptoms
which may arise for a moment from the pressure of these swelled organs
on the neighbouring parts. Besides, this swelling and the contraction
that follows it, may take place especially in the cellular texture of
the gland, and consequently suppose less extensibility of the glandular
texture than they at first seem to.


II. _Vital Properties. Properties of Animal Life._

The animal contractility is evidently nothing in the glandular texture.
Does the sensibility of the same kind exist in it? The following facts
are connected with this. 1st. A compression of the parotid is to a
certain degree painful. I have even been obliged, in a particular case,
to give up the method of compression that Desault had advised for a
salivary fistula, on account of the pain the patient experienced; but
the numerous nerves which traverse this gland may be the cause of these
pains. 2d. We know that the instant the lithotome cuts the prostate,
or the stone and forceps pass over it, the patient suffers very much.
3d. Stones lodged in the kidneys occasion horrible pains. 4th. Any
considerable pressure of the testicle is very painful.

On the other hand we can cut the texture of the liver and the animal
will give no signs of pain. Haller, after many experiments, ranked the
glands among the insensible parts. What is to be concluded from this?
That the animal sensibility, modified in a thousand ways, appears
to exist in many organs in which certain agents cannot put it in
action, and in which others develop it remarkably. We know that the
various morbid alterations render it very evident in the glands. The
inflammatory pain of these organs has even a peculiar character; it
is obtuse and dull in the greatest number of cases. There is never
experienced in them the acute sensation which characterises cellular
inflammation, or the sharp and biting pain of which the skin is so
often the seat.


_Properties of Organic Life._

Of the properties of organic life, the sensible contractility is
wanting in the glandular system. But the two other properties are
developed in it to the highest degree. They are in constant activity;
secretion, excretion and nutrition keep them in incessant action there.
It is by its organic sensibility that the gland distinguishes, in the
mass of blood, the materials which are proper for its secretion. It is
by its insensible contractility, or its tonic forces, that it contracts
to throw out those which are foreign to this secretion. The first is on
a small scale in each gland, what the animal sensibility of the tongue
and the nostrils is on a large one, which allows only aliments suitable
for the stomach to be introduced into its cavity; the other does
insensibly, what is effected in so evident a manner by the glottis,
when it rises up convulsively against a foreign body that attempts to
enter it. The blood contains the materials of all the secretions, of
the nutrition of all the organs, and of all the exhalations. Each gland
draws from this common reservoir what is necessary to its secretion, as
each organ does what is proper for its nutrition, and as each serous
surface does what is suitable for its exhalation. Now it is by its
organic sensibility that each living part of the body distinguishes
what its functions require.

When the fluids enter the small vessels of the gland, this sensibility
is the sentinel that gives notice of it, and the insensible
contractility is the agent which opens or closes the gates of the
organ, according to the principles that are presented. This comparison,
if I may be allowed the use of it, gives an idea of what then takes
place. Every glandular action turns then especially upon these two
properties, and as this action is almost permanent, they are then
constantly in exercise.

From this it is evident, that all the glandular diseases ought to
suppose a derangement in these properties; for, as we have often seen,
they are the predominant properties of an organ, those, the exercise
of which constitutes its peculiar life, which especially determine its
diseases, by their alteration. This is in fact what observation shows
us. Here we see these properties increased or diminished, sometimes
produce an increase of secretion, as in diabetes, mercurial salivation,
immoderate flow of bile, &c.; sometimes a diminution, a suspension
even of this function, as in acute diseases in which all the ducts are
closed as it were in a moment, as in the suppression of urine, dryness
of the mouth, &c. It is the alteration in the nature of the glandular
sensibility that puts it in relation with fluids foreign to the glands
in a natural state; hence the innumerable varieties of the secreted
fluids especially in diseases. I have spoken of these varieties as
it regards the mucous fluids. The liver and the kidneys particularly
do not experience less numerous ones. The taste, the colour, the
consistence and odour of cystic bile appear in a thousand different
states in dead bodies. Who is ignorant of the innumerable alterations
of which the urine is susceptible? The saliva is less variable; but in
diseases how different is it from its natural state. It is sufficient
to have noticed for some time the various evacuations in diseases, to
see of how many modifications they are capable. Nothing less resembles
the urine and bile, than the fluids sometimes thrown out by the bladder
and the liver; whence do these varieties arise? From this, that
the variable organic sensibility places the organ in relation with
substances to which it was foreign in a natural state; and from this,
that the insensible contractility allows substances to enter the organ
which it before excluded. The same gland without changing its texture,
by a modification only of its vital forces, can then be a source of an
infinite variety of different fluids; I believe even that the kidney,
by taking a sensibility analogous to that of the liver, may secrete
bile. Why may it not secrete it, if it can secrete other fluids so
different from its own?

In health, each gland has a mode of sensibility nearly uniform, a mode
which changes but little; thus each secreted fluid has an appearance,
a consistence and a nature always nearly the same. But in diseases,
a thousand causes change this mode at every instant. An hysterical
paroxysm strikes the kidneys; in an instant they repulse all the
principles that colour the urine, and this comes out limpid; the
paroxysm passes off, the organ resumes its ordinary sensibility, and
the urine returns to its usual state. The influence of the epileptic
paroxysm extends to the sensibility of the salivary glands; in a
moment, a thick, copious and frothy saliva, wholly different from the
natural, comes from the mouth; after the paroxysm, the sympathetic
storm is calmed in the gland, and the saliva returns to its ordinary
state. If I may be allowed the comparison, the glands are in diseases
like the atmosphere in the equinoxes. At these periods, the winds which
succeed each other and incessantly change, often make rain, hail and
snow succeed each other in a very short time; so the forces of the
glandular life, constantly variable in diseases, make the different
products of secretion vary with rapidity.

It is not only to secretion that the various alterations of the organic
sensibility and the insensible contractility of the glands extend;
these alterations when long continued, have an influence also upon
their nutrition; they disturb the course of it; hence the changes of
texture, the tumours of different kinds, the organic diseases, &c.
that are so frequent in the glandular system, a system which presents
the greatest field for morbid anatomy. The great number of organic
diseases which it exhibits, in our dissecting rooms, compared with most
of the other systems, is very striking. The glandular, the cutaneous,
the mucous, the serous, the cellular systems, &c. hold the first rank
in this respect. Observe also that it is in them that the organic
sensibility and the insensible contractility are raised to the highest
degree, because they are the only ones in which these properties are
brought into action not only by nutrition, but also by various other
functions that are going on in the insensible capillary system, viz. by
exhalation, absorption and secretion.


_Sympathies._

Few systems are more frequently the seat of sympathies than this. In
examining them I shall adopt the same order as in the preceding system.


_Passive Sympathies._

The glandular texture is affected with extreme ease by all the others.
This constitutes its passive sympathies. They take place, 1st, in a
natural state; 2d, in diseases.

I say first that there are certain cases in the natural state, in which
the other organs being excited, the glandular is brought into action.
This is especially remarkable in the mucous system. We have seen that
almost all the excretory ducts terminate upon the mucous surfaces.
Now when one of these surfaces is irritated in the neighbourhood of
an excretory duct, the gland of this duct increases its action. 1st.
The presence of aliments in the mouth produces an abundant flow of
saliva. 2d. A sound in the bladder, irritating the ureters or their
neighbourhood, increases the flow of urine. 3d. The irritation of the
glans penis and the extremity of the urethra in coition, produces a
kind of spasm in the testicle from which arises a copious secretion
of the seminal fluid. 4th. Every irritating fluid applied either to
the conjunctiva, or the pituitary membrane occasions a more or less
considerable flow of tears. 5th. By making experiments upon the state
of the gastric viscera during digestion and during hunger, I have
observed that as long as the aliments are only in the stomach, the flow
of bile is inconsiderable, but that this flow increases when they pass
into the duodenum, so that much of it is then found in the intestines.
During hunger, the gall-bladder is much distended; but little bile
flows from it. At the end or even during digestion, it contains but
half as much bile. Yet it might be emptied much more easily during
abstinence, as the fluid which is then found in it is of a deep green,
very bitter, very acrid and consequently very irritating. On the
contrary, during or immediately after digestion, it is much milder,
of a bright yellow and less irritating. There must then be another
stimulus for it during digestion; this stimulus is the food that is
passing by the extremity of the ductus choledochus. I have pointed
out in a long note in my Treatise on the Membranes, the course of the
cystic and hepatic bile.

Let us conclude from these numerous considerations, that one of the
principal means which nature employs to increase the action of the
glands, and to produce that of the excretory ducts is the sympathetic
irritation of the extremity of these ducts or of the neighbourhood of
the point of the mucous surface where they come out. It is to this also
that must be referred the various catarrhs produced by an irritating
body remaining upon one of these surfaces. The infant in sucking and
irritating the nipple, produces a secretion of milk at the same time
that he draws it out. In a morbid state the glands are also very
frequently the seat of passive sympathies. It is almost always then the
organic sensibility and the insensible contractility that are brought
into action in them. It is rare, that the animal sensibility, excited
by sympathies, occasions pains in the glands.

We have said that the varieties the glands exhibit in diseases are
innumerable, either as it respects the quantity or the quality of the
fluids they secrete. Now all these varieties are especially owing to
sympathetic influence. Observe the salivary glands moistening the mouth
or leaving it dry, filling it with a viscid or limpid fluid, frothy
or thin, the mucous glands of the tongue furnishing sometimes a thick
whitish substance, and sometimes a black crust. Physicians consider the
state of the tongue as a constant index of that of the stomach; this
is most often true. Nature has established such a sympathetic relation
between these two parts, that when the mucous surface of the stomach
is disordered, and is the seat of that kind of catarrh which is called
derangement, fulness of the stomach, &c. that of the tongue is also
affected and furnishes more mucous juices, which alter and destroy the
appetite, and thus prevent the taking of aliments which the stomach
could not digest, and which often even it would not bear. The tongue
is then, as in a state of health, a kind of sentinel placed over the
stomach, to refuse that which would injure, and to admit that which is
suitable for it. This is no doubt the cause of this singular influence
which the stomach exerts upon it in diseases. But let us also remark
that sometimes the tongue is foul, when the stomach is in the ordinary
state. This phenomenon is frequent in hospitals; it happens to me very
often. And vice versa, nausea, &c. sometimes takes place without a
catarrh of the tongue.

Shall I speak of the innumerable influences that the liver, the kidney
and the pancreas receive? When an organ is diseased in the animal
economy, these immediately perceive it; their secretion is increased,
diminished or altered, and oftentimes even the sympathetic affection
does not extend to these functions, but produces inflammation,
suppuration, &c. We know that abscesses are formed in the liver from
wounds in the head, &c. Shall I speak of the innumerable varieties of
the flowing of tears in acute diseases, in inflammatory and malignant
fevers, &c.? Who does not know that the eye is then more or less moist,
that it is often constantly weeping? Now whence arise these varieties?
from the sympathetic influence which the lachrymal gland receives. The
disease itself is often foreign to it; but the unknown consensus which
connects the glands with the diseased parts, makes them then enter into
action. We weep from a variety of passions, from grief especially; how
does this happen? Because the influence of the passion is first carried
to the epigastric region, as the violent sensation experienced there,
proves; and the affected organ reacts upon the lachrymal gland. We weep
in the same way as we sweat from fear, or spit copiously in anger, a
phenomenon which the vulgar express by these words, _foaming with rage_.

The testicles and the prostate are much less often sympathetically
influenced in diseases than the other glands. Whilst every thing is
disturbed in the glandular system, they most frequently remain calm
and tranquil. Why? because they are insulated by their functions from
the other glands. The salivary glands, the pancreas, the kidneys,
the liver and almost all the mucous glands contribute to one common
object, viz. digestion. This object is connected with the existence of
most of the other organs. When these are diseased, it is not wonderful
that the glands feel it. On the contrary, the testicles, destined only
to the purpose of generation, entering later into action and ceasing
to act sooner than the other glands, having great intermissions in
their action, cannot in their affections be thus connected with the
diseases of the other organs. Sometimes however they are. We know that
some affections of the lungs dispose to venereal pleasures; that in a
natural state, a lively excitement of certain parts of the skin, of
that of the glutæi muscles especially brings into activity the whole
genital system, &c. &c.

We know the remarkable sympathy that renders the mammæ dependant upon
the womb. It is well known, that they swell a little every month,
at the beginning of menstruation; that cancers are often formed in
them at the cessation of this natural discharge; that the voluptuous
sensation of coition sometimes extends even to them, &c. All physicians
have observed this sympathetic relation which appears to be of a
peculiar kind and to depend upon the analogy of the functions of the
sympathizing organs.

After severe acute diseases, especially idiopathic fevers, the
glandular action is oftentimes much increased; there are great
evacuations; these are the crises; it is, according to the opinions of
most, the morbific humour that is expelled. This is a phenomenon that
should be examined, and which certainly in many cases does not depend,
as I shall prove, on the cause to which it has been attributed.

Though I consider many of the secretory derangements in diseases as
sympathetic, I am far from thinking that all are so. Certainly in
many cases, there is a general affection of the whole system, an
affection in which the glands, like all the other parts, participate;
this is what takes place in idiopathic fevers. But when one system is
especially affected, as the cutaneous in the small pox, the measles,
scarlatina, &c. the serous in pleurisy, peritonitis, &c. the cellular
in phlegmon, the nervous in convulsions, &c. I call the derangement
which the others experience sympathetic, and which does not depend upon
an injury of their texture.

Other ideas may be attached to the word sympathies, but these are
what I have connected with it in diseases. The word is of but little
consequence, provided what it expresses is understood.


_Active Sympathies._

These sympathies are less frequent than the preceding. In the diseases
of the glandular system, we see however examples of them. The history
of inflammations of the kidneys, the salivary glands, the liver, &c.
shows us many phenomena arising sympathetically in the other systems
on account of the diseases of this. I do not speak of the derangement
of digestion and the circulation, functions which, naturally connected
with the secretions, are inevitably deranged when these are; I speak of
the organs, which having no direct relation with the diseased glands,
are yet affected, as we see in convulsions, spasms, wandering or fixed
pains in different places, sweats, &c.

The testicles in health exert a remarkable influence upon the organs
of the voice. We know that it becomes more harsh the moment they enter
into action, and that it changes when they are removed by castration;
this phenomenon is constant and invariable. Barthez believed that it
arose from the ordinary sympathetic phenomena; in fact, it appears
to be but a particular modification of that general influence which
the testicles exert on all the vital forces, which are uniformly
debilitated or strengthened, according as their action is feeble or
strong. Yet some organs are more disposed than others to feel these
affections. The pectoral mucous system is an example of this. Passive
hemorrhage of this system is frequently the consequence of excessive
excretion of semen; phthisis even is often the fatal effect of it.


_Characters of the Vital Properties. First Character. Life peculiar to
each Gland._

The glandular life, the result of the preceding forces considered in
exercise, is not uniform in the whole system, no doubt because its
texture differs in each gland, and because to each texture is given a
peculiar modification of vitality. Many phenomena result from these
differences which have been well observed by Bordeu.

1st. Each gland has certain substances with which it is exclusively in
relation in the natural state. Hence why the salivary glands do not
secrete bile, and the liver allows the materials of urine to pass in
its vessels without separating them; from this results the diversity
of secretions. Hence also why cantharides affect exclusively the
kidneys; why mercury acts especially upon the salivary glands; why
certain substances affect the testicles in a peculiar manner, increase
their secretion and even promote the excretion of the semen; why some
aliments give more milk than others. I am persuaded that certain
substances act upon the mucous glands and dispose them to a greater
secretion.

2d. Each gland has its peculiar mode of sympathies. We have seen that
the testicles sympathize especially with the pectoral organs, and the
liver with the brain. The kidneys, when affected with acute pain,
have an influence peculiarly on the stomach, and occasion vomiting.
The mammæ and the womb are directly and particularly connected in
sympathies.

3d. The inflammation of each gland has a particular character. That of
the kidneys does not resemble that of the liver, the testicles, &c. The
prostate gland when inflamed produces symptoms wholly different from
those of the testicles, &c. I do not speak of the differences resulting
from the diversity of the fluids, but only of those which arise from
the difference of texture.

4th. Each gland has its peculiar diseases, or such at least to which
it is disposed more than the others. Hydatids are very often found
near the convexity of the liver; they are never seen in the salivary
glands or the testicles. Though the parotid glands are as much exposed
to the action of external bodies as the testicles, there are twenty
sarcoceles to one scirrhus of these glands. The liver alone exhibits
that peculiar state that is called fatty; no gland is more frequently
the seat of steatomatous tumours. Physicians who have opened but few
bodies, employ the vague and insignificant word _obstruction_, &c. for
every kind of glandular swelling. But observe that most commonly these
swellings have nothing in common among them but the increase in size;
their nature is wholly different, and yet observe how ignorant many are
in medicine; they perceive by the touch that there is a hardness of the
liver, and immediately aperients, the acetate of potash, &c. are the
common means which they oppose to hydatids, to steatomatous tumours, to
scirrhi with granulations like marble, to fatty livers and to a hundred
different alterations from which the increase of size may arise, as
if it was this increase and not the kind of tumour that produced it,
which they had to combat. Give then also aperients when the liver
displaced by hydrothorax projects unnaturally, and you will act almost
as rationally.

5th. Each gland exhibits peculiar modifications in those evacuations
that are called critical, of which it is sometimes the seat after long
diseases, &c. &c.

6th. It is also to the difference of vitality of the different parts of
the glandular system, that must be referred the following phenomenon;
certain glands enter suddenly into action, either from a direct
irritation, or a sympathetic excitement, as the lachrymal for example,
which from a state of remission passes suddenly from the influence
of the passions, to that of copious secretion. On the contrary, it
requires some time to excite the other glands, as for example the
kidneys, pancreas, &c. which cannot suddenly pour out their fluids,
whatever may be the excitement they experience. The same stimulus
applied to the conjunctiva, produces a flow of tears, and at the same
time increases the action of the Meibomian glands; but the first effect
takes place before the other. The same stimuli applied to the mucous
surfaces can never produce a catarrhal discharge till the expiration of
some time.


_Second Character. Remission of the Glandular Life._

The second character of the glandular life, is that of being subject
to habitual alternations of increase and diminution. Sleep extends
especially to the animal functions; they alone are completely suspended
in the ordinary state, and it is this which constitutes sleep. But the
glands sleep also to a certain extent, though there is never a complete
suspension except in diseases. I would compare the sleep of animal life
to the intermissions of intermittent fevers in which the apyrexia is
complete, and the sleep of the glands to those of remitting fevers in
which the paroxysm is only moderated, though it always continues.

The saliva is copiously poured out when aliments enter the mouth, at
other times it only moistens this cavity. Whilst the chyme is passing
through the duodenum, the pancreas and liver moisten it abundantly;
they are also in action during hunger, but in an infinitely less
degree. I have convinced myself of this by many experiments upon the
comparative state of digestion and hunger; the substance of these
experiments I have given elsewhere. We know that it is some time after
eating before the kidneys commence their action. The intermissions of
the action of the mammæ are almost as real as those of the organs of
animal life. Each mucous gland has its time of secretion; it is that in
which the surfaces, to which the excretories go, are in contact with
any substance that is remaining there, or that is only passing.

The glands then must be considered as continually separating a fluid
from the blood, and as being at certain periods in greater activity,
and consequently as furnishing more fluids.

This remission of the glands appears to be owing to a cause nearly
analogous to that of sleep, which, in animal life, is produced by the
weariness the sensitive and locomotive organs experience, after long
continued action. The kind of weariness which the glands are capable of
experiencing, is not in general attended with a painful sensation, as
in animal life; its nature appears to be wholly different. Yet women,
after nursing too long, feel a pain in the breast that warns them to
leave off. The testicles become the seat of a painful sensation, when
the emission of semen has been many times forced.


_Third Character. The Glandular Life is never simultaneously raised in
the whole system._

The vital properties of the glands are never simultaneously excited
in all. When one is in action, the others are in remission. We might
say, that there is but a determinate quantity of life for all, and
that one cannot live more without the others living less. To this law
is the digestive order accommodated. In the first period the salivary
glands furnish at first a great quantity of fluid; in the second, the
parietes of the stomach; in the third, in which the chyme passes into
the small intestines, the liver and the pancreas are principally in
action; in the fourth, it is the mucous glands of the great intestines
which especially act; and finally the kidneys enter into a particular
action in order to evacuate the residue of the fluids. All the glands
cannot act at the same time; it is as in the external motions in which
certain muscles always rest whilst the others contract. The most
improper time for coition is that of digestion, because we then make
the mucous, hepatic, pancreatic secretions, &c. coincide with that of
the testicles. In diseases one gland increases its secretion only at
the expense of the others. Observation proves this every day.

We might, as I have said, make use of this remark, by producing in
various glandular and other affections, artificial catarrhs, a disease
which we can always produce on the mucous surfaces by the introduction
of a foreign body. I have for some time past made much use of ammonia
respired by the nose. Pinel prescribes it before the paroxysms of
epilepsy. There are an infinite number of other cases in which it is
very efficacious, as in some kinds of cephalalgia, in ataxic fevers,
in certain apoplexies, in various comatose affections, &c. A blister
does not act till the expiration of some time; it requires four, five,
six hours even for it to produce an irritation. Who does not know that
oftentimes in diseases in which the forces are much prostrated, it has
no action on the cutaneous system? On the contrary, the excitement of
the pituitary membrane by ammonia is always sudden on the one hand
and always efficacious on the other. Its effect, it is true, is only
instantaneous, but this is precisely its advantage; for in many cases
a blister is only useful the moment it irritates the skin; hence the
use of drying it immediately and reapplying it. The employment of
ammonia or of any other strong stimulant upon the pituitary membrane,
can be repeated every quarter of an hour, every five or six minutes
or even every minute. If habit renders the patient less sensible to
its excitement, we can replace it by another irritating substance,
whereas we cannot thus change the cutaneous excitement by a blister.
What I have said of the pituitary surface is applicable to those of the
rectum, the urethra and stomach, on which we can in many cases apply in
diseases excitements in a more advantageous manner than is done upon
the skin by means of blisters.

Moreover, the character of the glandular life of which we are treating,
is only an insulated modification of a character general to all the
vital properties, a character which consists in this, that they are
weakened in one place when they are raised in another. Hence why
the great collections of pus, large tumours and dropsies are always
attended with a weakness in the glandular action. It is upon this
character that rests the use of vesicatories, setons, moxa, cauteries,
&c. which do not act, as has been said, by evacuating the morbific
matter, but by making the irritation of the diseased part cease by that
which is produced elsewhere.


_Fourth Character. Influence of climate and season on Glandular Life._

Another phenomenon is also derived from the preceding character, and
it is one that may be likewise considered as characteristic of the
glandular system; viz. that in general it is in greater activity in
winter than summer, in cold climates than in warm. In fact, heat which
expands the cutaneous system increases the action of it at the expense
of that of the glands, and reciprocally cold which contracts it, by
preventing the constant exhalation that is going on there, forces the
glandular system to supply this action. Hence why the same fluid,
introduced into the economy, goes out with the urine in winter and with
the sweat in summer; why, if we wish to produce an immediate discharge
of urine in summer, it is necessary to suppress the perspiration by the
sudden application of cold to the surface of the skin, by descending
into a cellar, or some other subterraneous place; so that in summer we
can, after digestion, make the product of the fluids pass off with the
urine or the sweat, according to the temperature of the atmosphere in
which we digest; why teas and diuretics forbid the use of each other,
and why a physician who should employ them at the same time would know
but little of the laws of our economy; why most of the diseases that
are attended with an immoderate discharge of the secreted fluids, are
almost always characterized by a diminution of the exhaled fluids; why
in some seasons diseases have a greater tendency to be characterized
by sweats, and in others by urinary, mucous evacuations, &c. It is to
the greater degree of the vital activity of the glandular system in the
winter, that must then be referred the frequency of catarrhs, diseases
most of which suppose an unnatural increase of its action, the greater
facility with which the kidneys are influenced by cantharides, &c.
Physicians should have these considerations particularly in view in
their treatment. It is necessary to act more upon the glandular system
in winter, and the cutaneous in summer, because each system is as much
more disposed to answer to the excitements made upon it, as it actually
is in greater activity.


_Fifth Character. Influence of Sex upon Glandular Life._

Is the life of the glandular system more active in man than in woman?
As it respects the glands destined to digestion, the secretion of the
tears, the evacuation of urine, &c. there is but little difference
in the two sexes. As to genital glands, man has testicles and the
prostate; woman has mammæ, so that in this respect they seem to be
equal. Observe however that the influence of the first upon the
economy, is much greater than that of the second. It is from the womb
that go forth in woman the irradiations which correspond with those
which the testicles send to all the other organs.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

Though the secretions are not active in the fœtus, the glandular system
is in general much developed. All the salivary glands and the pancreas
are larger in proportion than afterwards; the liver is enormous; and
the kidneys have a size much greater in proportion than they have in
the adult. The same probably is true of the mucous glands, though I
have not made any very precise researches upon this point. The form is
different in many; the kidney for example is evidently uneven, whilst
afterwards its surface is almost smooth. The colour is not the same;
this is particularly striking in the salivary and lachrymal glands.
These glands which are white in the adult, have in the fœtus an extreme
redness which they lose by washing, which is not owing to the blood
circulating in their vessels, though there is much of it in their
vessels, but it is really inherent in their texture. This colour is
never as great in the pancreas, though its texture is nearly the same.
The texture of the glands is extremely soft and delicate at this age,
which is the case with all the parts. They are divided and yield with
great ease, and their vessels, which are large, carry into them a very
great quantity of fluid.

Then they are, if we may so say, in a state corresponding with that
of remission in the adult; they secrete even less fluid, though they
appear however to be in constant action. In fact, all the reservoirs
would be insufficient to contain their fluids, if in a given time, as
much flowed from them as after birth. Is this because the black blood,
which then enters their parenchyma, is unfit to furnish the materials
of the secretions? This may have an influence, and I have elsewhere
imagined it, from the circumstance that this blood is unable to support
many other functions. But the principal reason appears to me to be,
that in the fœtus the nutritive motion of composition predominates
evidently over that of decomposition, which is very inconsiderable.
Almost every thing which arrives in the organs remains in them and
continues to furnish the materials of the rapid growth which is then
taking place in the body; now, the secretions being principally
destined to carry off the residue of nutrition, must then be very
inactive.

Besides, digestion does not introduce into the blood any of those
principles which, being useless to nutrition, must on this account
go out as they entered, that is to say without making a part of our
organs; such are for example most of the drinks, which only pass into
the mass of blood, and go out immediately with the urine.

The glands of the fœtus are then like the brain at that age; though
much developed, they remain inactive; they are in the expectation of
action.


II. _State of the Glandular System during Growth._

At birth, the glandular system increases suddenly in energy; it takes
a life which until then was foreign to it, and begins to pour out more
fluid. It owes this change, 1st, to the difference of the blood which
enters it, and which till then black and consequently venous, then
becomes red and charged with principles that are new to it; 2d, to
the general and sudden excitement carried to the extremity of all the
excretories, by the aliments to those which open upon the canal that
extends from the mouth to the anus, by the air to the mucous ducts of
the bronchial and pituitary surfaces and to the lachrymal gland, by the
various frictions of the extremity of the glans penis and even by the
air which acts also upon it, to the kidneys and the bladder.

All the glands are so much the more sensible to this sudden excitement,
as they are unaccustomed to it. Their sensibility, heretofore torpid,
is roused; they feel the contact of the blood which enters them and
which till then had made only a feeble impression upon them. This
sensation is so much the more acute, as on the one hand the organic
sensibility of the glands becomes more evident, and as on the other
the red blood is a more powerful stimulus than the black; for, as I
have already had occasion to observe, the blood that arrives in an
organ produces two effects in it, one of which is to excite it, either
by the motion it communicates, or by the contact of the principles
it contains, and the other is to furnish materials for the different
functions, as for exhalation, secretion, nutrition, &c. The first
effect is common to all the organs which the blood enters; the second
is peculiar to each.

I would observe however that many of the secretions are much less
active during the first years, than they are afterwards; such are those
of the salivary glands, the liver, &c. The kidneys being destined to
throw out the residue of digestion, as much and more often than that
of nutrition, are in a state of activity in proportion to that of the
first function. The infant often passes urine, as he frequently voids
excrements. It is not because many substances, returning from the
organs which they have nourished, present themselves to the kidneys, to
be thrown out by this part.

The affections of the glandular system are not the predominant ones
in early age. 1st. It is not the parotids that are enlarged in the
frequent swellings that take place in their neighbourhood, but it is
almost always the lymphatic glands. 2d. We know that an excessive flow
of bile, and the affections which arise from it, are then very rare.
3d. All the secretions relating to generation are absolutely nothing.
4th. In the same proportion in which the organic affections of the
liver and the kidneys are common in the adult, are they rare in the
infant. Then it is in what are improperly called lymphatic glands,
in the brain, &c. that the morbid anatomist finds materials for his
researches; for observe that the organs which are particularly in
action in one age, are those which are most often attacked by acute
and chronic diseases at that age, and that on the contrary they seem
to forget those in which but little is done. 5th. Surgeons know that
sarcoceles, hydroceles by effusion, varicoceles and all the diseases of
the testicles are as rare before the period of puberty, when nutrition
only is going on in these glands, as they are common in the subsequent
years.

It appears that it is the mucous glands which are then the most
commonly affected and are consequently in the greatest activity. The
lachrymal glands are also very frequently in action. The infant weeps
more often than the adult; we might say that all the passions which
agitate this age have but one uniform mode of expression, and this
mode is weeping. If the infant suffers, if he is jealous or frightened
he weeps; if he is furious, he weeps because he is not very strong.
This influence of the passions upon the lachrymal gland in the early
years, seems to take place at the expense of the influence exerted
upon the other glands. It is rare that fear or fright give to infants
a sudden jaundice, or that they excite bilious secretions. At this age
they do not pass water and void their excrements from fright as often
as in the after ages; they have not the spasmodic vomitings that are
so frequently occasioned by the passions of the adult; they do not
become pale or red as much in anger; thus the countenance is not to
the same extent the moveable picture upon which is painted the emotions
of the mind. The eye does not sparkle in anger and is not expressive
in friendship. It is the lachrymal gland which then most often serves
in the face, for the expression of the passions. Observe that this
expression is that of weakness and want of power, it is that of woman,
who resembles the infant in so many phenomena. The feeble stag opposes
his tears to the dogs, who seize upon him to devour him.

The glandular texture remains for a long time soft and delicate in the
infant. At birth and in the fœtus, neither the liver nor the kidneys
have the singular property of hardening by boiling. They remain during
this experiment very tender and yield easily to the least impression.
If the boiling be ever so long continued, they do not lose this
character, which is gradually weakened as we advance in age, and which
at this period makes the glands fit for some uses in our kitchens to
which they are not so proper in the adult.


III. _State of the Glandular System after Growth._

Puberty commences about the period that growth finishes. A gland till
then inactive in man, enters suddenly into activity. The prostate
follows it in its development. In woman the breasts swell, separate,
and acquire in a short time a size which they would not have done
in many years, if they had grown according to the same laws as in
the preceding state. The other glands, far from being weakened, in
proportion as these become stronger, increase their action also; they
become stronger, and gradually lose the softness that characterized
them in infancy; they moreover grow harder.

Till then composition had predominated over decomposition in the
general nutritive motion. Then almost as many substances are constantly
thrown from each organ, as enter its interior to nourish it. Now as
the glands are the great emunctories which throw out the residue of
nutrition, they then pour out more fluids in proportion than before.

During youth it is the genital glands which predominate over the
others; they seem to be a centre whence go irradiations that animate
the whole machine. We might say most often that they are, in the
mechanism of our moral actions, the spring which puts every thing in
motion.

As we recede from youth, the influence of the genital glands becomes
weaker, because they are in less activity. Towards the thirty-sixth or
fortieth year, it is especially the glands destined to digestion which
predominate over the others, and among these the liver in particular
seems to be in activity. Then the bilious affections are predominant;
then the passions to which the bilious temperament seems to dispose
us, more frequently agitate the mind. Ambition, hatred and jealousy
are often the sad attendants of this age. These passions are then
more durable. The levity of youth and the passions arising from the
influence of the genital glands, which predominate at this age, had
for a time suppressed these, or rather had prevented them from being
developed. Then they remain alone, the others having escaped in smoke
with the fire of youth. Then also the influence of the lively emotions
of the mind affects especially the glands and the abdominal viscera.
Then is felt that contraction at the epigastric region, the painful
effect of the bad passions; jaundice occasioned by sorrow is then more
frequent.

This age is that of the organic affections of the glands, of all the
numerous changes of texture, of all the excrescences which destroying
as it were the nature of these organs, transform them into bodies of a
different texture. In infancy, leucophlegmasia is most often produced
by an engorgement of those lymphatic bunches that are called glands,
which resembles tabes mesenterica, the engorgement of the bronchial
glands, &c. In the adult on the contrary, it is with the diseases of
the liver, of the spleen, of the kidneys, that it is most often seen.


IV. _State of the Glandular System in Old Age._

In old age, the glands become more firm and hard. Before that period
even, the glandular system of animals ceases to be used at our tables.
The liver, the kidneys, the spleen, &c. are mixed with the fleshy
texture in common boiled meat, only to communicate to it some salts,
some savoury principles that are foreign to this texture. They are
not eaten, or at least they are not agreeable to the taste. The lungs
which contain so great a quantity of mucous glands, do not afford a
very digestible aliment except those of the calf; those of the ox are
not brought to our tables, especially when the animal is old. I would
observe upon this subject that the muscular and glandular systems are
in an inverse order as it respects digestion, at least in the stewed
state to which they are reduced for nourishment. In fact, the glandular
system has not an agreeable taste and is not very digestible except in
young animals, whilst at this age the muscular is insipid, and does not
become savoury food till towards the middle of life.

In extreme old age, the colour of the glands changes less than that of
most of the other organs. We find the liver, the kidneys, &c. almost
as full of blood as in the adult; they are as red, whilst the muscles
pale and colourless announce by their appearance that but little blood
enters them at the latter periods of life. We might say that this fluid
first abandons the skin and the muscles of animal life which in the
trunk are subjacent to it, and which in the extremities are found very
distant from the heart, or at least that it diminishes much in the two
systems, and is concentrated in the organs in the neighbourhood of
the heart; thus the secretions are still very abundant in old people,
whilst the muscular, nervous forces, &c. are considerably weakened. The
kidneys still secrete much urine; the liver pours out much bile, though
this gland loses in part the kind of predominance it exercised in the
economy towards the fortieth year. We know that the very frequent
catarrhs that then take place, indicate an increase of action in the
mucous glands. The functions of the testicles and mammæ have long since
ceased.

The activity of the glands remaining in exercise, appears to be owing
to two causes. 1st. The decomposition being very great at this age,
many substances are presented to the glands to be thrown out. An old
person decreases by a phenomenon opposite to the rapid growth of the
fœtus, in which the glandular system throws out scarcely any thing
from the economy. 2d. The skin having the horny hardness and being
contracted, ceasing in part to be an emunctory of the products of
decomposition, the glands supply the place of these functions. The
cutaneous and glandular systems are then in the same relation as in
winter and in cold countries, in which, we have seen, that the second
constantly supplies the place of the first.

In general, the glandular system is one of those in which life is the
most slowly extinguished. In the dead bodies of old people we find
the bile still filling the gall-bladder, the bladder full of urine,
&c. All the glands when compressed, the prostate itself, permit a
large quantity of fluid to escape from their excretories. I have even
observed that in this compression, we uniformly press out more fluid in
an old subject than in a young one. The older the animals are, the more
their kidneys, as we know, preserve the urinous smell. The lungs, which
abound so much in mucous surfaces and consequently in mucous glands,
are not withered and have not the horny hardening in old age; they
perform their functions as regularly as in youth.

In general it is a very remarkable phenomenon that all the principal
internal organs, the liver, the kidneys, the spleen, the heart, the
lungs, &c. still preserve a very considerable vital force, whilst the
sensitive and locomotive organs already almost exhausted, have broken
in part the communications which connect the individual with the
objects which surround him.




DERMOID SYSTEM.


All animals are covered with a more or less compact membrane, of a
thickness in general proportioned to the size of their body, destined
to defend the subjacent parts, to carry out a considerable portion of
the residue of nutrition and digestion, and to place it in relation
with external bodies. It is in man a sensitive boundary, placed at the
extremity of the domain of his mind, where these bodies continually
touch, for the purpose of establishing the relations of his animal
life, and of thus connecting his existence with that of every thing
which surrounds him. This covering is the _dermis_ or skin. We shall
call the whole of it the Dermoid System.


ARTICLE FIRST.

FORMS OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.

The covering which forms this system, being proportioned to the parts
that it covers, is applied to these parts, adapted to their great
inequalities, and allows the largest external prominences to be
visible, but conceals a great number on account of their small size;
thus the appearance of the body stripped of skin differs very much from
that with the skin on.

This covering everywhere continuous is reflected through different
openings in the interior of the body and goes to give origin to the
mucous system. The limits between the two systems are always marked by
a reddish line; within this line is the mucous system, without it the
dermoid. Yet the demarcation is not as striking in the organization
as in the colour. Both are confounded in an insensible manner. In the
neighbourhood of these openings, of those of the face especially, the
dermoid becomes more delicate. At the commencement of these openings,
the mucous borrows more or less, as I have said, the characters of the
first.


I. _External Surface of the Dermoid System._

This surface, everywhere contiguous to the epidermis, is remarkable
for the hairs which cover it, for the oily fluid which constantly
lubricates it, for the sweat that is deposited on it, for the sense of
feeling of which it is the seat and which the internal surface does not
possess. We shall in this article consider only the external dermoid
forms, without regard to these different objects.

We see upon this surface different kinds of folds.

1st. Some are owing to the subjacent muscles which, being intimately
connected with the dermis, forming almost a part of it, wrinkle it
when they contract. Such are the wrinkles on the forehead; those in
the form of rays which the orbicularis produces around the eye-lids,
&c.; those of which the cheeks are the seat, when the great and small
zygomatic, &c. contract; those which the orbicularis of the lips
produces around the mouth, when it contracts it by diminishing its
opening, &c. All these folds are owing to this, that on the one hand
the skin cannot contract like the muscles, and that on the other it
is necessary that it should occupy less space in length at the instant
these are shortened. They are of the same nature as those of which
the mucous surfaces, that of the stomach in particular, become the
seat in the contraction of the fleshy layer which is contiguous to
them. Thus the direction of these folds is always perpendicular to
that of the subjacent muscles whose fibres they cut at a right angle.
We are accustomed to attach much importance to the existence of these
wrinkles in the expression of the passions; no doubt because then they
are strongly marked. In fact the breadth of the face of man makes it
well adapted to their development, whilst that of animals is badly
formed to produce them. Thus their eye, rather than the features of the
face, is the moveable picture which is differently sketched at every
instant by the various feelings of anger, hatred, jealousy, &c. The
wrinkles of the human face contribute very much to the expression of
the countenance, they compose in part the physiognomy, and mark its
different shades.

The wrinkles of the scrotum are analogous to these; they depend upon
the contraction of the subjacent cellular texture, in which some fleshy
fibres appear also to exist.

2d. There are other wrinkles which are owing also to the motions, but
not to those of the subjacent muscles. There are those of the sole of
the foot, and especially those of the palm of the hand. There is not
there any sub-cutaneous muscle adhering to the skin, except the small
palmar muscle, which has no agency in these wrinkles that are formed at
the places where the skin is constantly folded in flexion. Thus there
are many of them about all the articulations of the phalanges. In the
palm of the hand, we see three principal ones, one at the base of the
thumb, produced by the motion of opposition, another at the anterior
part of the palm, occasioned by the flexion of the four last phalanges
which are bent towards the thumb, and the third is found in the middle
of the palm. The dermis is folded between these depressed lines, in
the motions in which the hand is hollowed. Many other small folds
corresponding with less evident and less frequent motions, cut these at
different angles.

On the back of the foot and hand, there are many wrinkles about each
articulation of the phalanges, when they are extended. They disappear
in flexion, and are owing to this, that nature, on account of the
motions, has made the skin more loose at this place, and broader in
proportion to the parts it covers. About most of the articulations,
there are analogous folds, but they are much less evident, because the
skin adheres less to the neighbouring parts. Upon the whole trunk, the
arm, the fore-arm, the thigh and the leg, we see no depressions but
those from the muscular prominences.

3d. There is a third species of wrinkles, or rather cutaneous
impressions, which are not very evident, found especially on the sole
of the foot and the palm of the hand and which we easily distinguish
from the preceding; they are those which indicate the rows of the
papillæ. The surface of the trunk presents hardly any thing similar.

4th. Finally, there are the wrinkles of old age, which are of a wholly
different nature. The sub-cutaneous fat having in part disappeared, the
skin becomes too large for the parts it covers; now as it has lost with
age its contractility of texture, it does not contract, but folds in
various directions. Thus where there was the most fat, as on the face,
these wrinkles are the most evident, they resemble those that appear on
the abdomen after several pregnancies, dropsy, &c. In young people, if
emaciation takes place suddenly, the skin contracts, and no wrinkle is
formed.


II. _Internal Surface of the Dermoid System._

This surface answers everywhere to the cellular texture which is loose
upon the trunk, the thighs, the arms, &c. and which is condensed
upon the cranium, the hand, &c. In most animals, a fleshy layer
called panniculus, and of a form analogous to that which is almost
everywhere subjacent to the mucous system of man, separates the skin
from the other parts, and communicates to it various motions. In man,
the dermoid system exhibits here and there traces of this internal
muscle, as is observed in the platysma myoides, the occipito-frontalis
and most of the muscles of the face. There is nothing similar on the
trunk, extremities, &c. Man is as much inferior in this respect to most
animals, as he is superior by the arrangement of his facial muscles.
Thus observe that whilst in him all the passions are painted as it
were upon the face, and the whole exterior of the trunk remains calm
in these tempests of the mind, this exterior is convulsively agitated
in animals. The mane of the lion becomes erect, the whole skin of the
horse moves, a thousand different agitations animate the exterior of
the trunk of animals, and make it a general picture on which is painted
all that passes in the interior. You can determine from behind, in
many animals, by seeing only their bodies, that they are agitated with
passion; cover the face of man, the curtain is drawn over the mirror of
his mind; thus almost all nations leave it uncovered. The physiognomy
is in this respect, if we may so say, more generally spread over the
exterior, in animals with a fleshy panniculus.

Besides the cellular texture, the dermis is almost everywhere
subjacent to the muscles in the trunk; but, foreign to the motions of
these muscles, it receives no sensible influence from them. In the
extremities it is found separated from the fleshy layers by aponeurotic
expansions. Many vessels wind under it; the great veins pass through
its texture; many arterial ramifications go upon its surface, and many
nerves between these ramifications.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.


I. _Texture peculiar to this Organization._

This texture comprehends, 1st, the chorion; 2d, that which is called
the reticular body; 3d, the papillæ. The chorion is the essential part
of the dermis; it is that which determines its thickness and form. The
reticular body appears to be but little distinct from it. The papillæ
arise from it also, but are more evident.


_Chorion._

The chorion is of a very variable thickness. 1st. In the head, that
of the cranium and that of the face exhibit an opposite arrangement.
The first is very thick and also dense and compact, which is owing
especially to the numerous hairs that go through it. The second,
everywhere fine and delicate, is particularly so upon the eyelids and
the lips. 2d. The chorion of the trunk is posteriorly and all along the
back, of a thickness almost double that of its anterior part, where it
is nearly the same upon the neck, the chest and the abdomen. I would
except however that of the penis, the scrotum, the great labia and the
mammæ, in which its delicacy is greater than any where else. 3d. In the
superior extremities it is nearly uniform upon the shoulders, the arm
and the fore-arm; on the hand it increases a little in thickness and
more in the palm than on the back. 4th. This thickness is generally
much more evident on the thigh and the leg, where there are more
muscles, than on the arm or the fore-arm. On the foot, it increases as
on the hand, less in the dorsal than in the plantar region, which is
the thickest of all the parts of the dermoid system; which is owing
principally in the natural state to the arrangement of its epidermis.
We see from this, that though everywhere continuous, the chorion is
very different in its different parts. The relation of its thickness
with its functions is easily perceived on the hand, the foot, the
cranium, &c. Elsewhere we cannot so well see the reason of these
differences, which are notwithstanding as constant.

Woman has a chorion generally less thick than that of man; compared in
all the regions, it exhibits in the two sexes a sensible difference; on
the mammæ especially, it is much more delicate in woman. That of the
great labia however is proportionally thicker than that of the scrotum.

In order to understand perfectly the intimate structure of the chorion,
it is necessary to examine it at first on its internal surface, after
having carefully separated it from the fatty cellular texture, to which
this surface adheres more or less intimately. We see then that it is
differently arranged according to the regions.

1st. On the sole of the foot and the palm of the hand, we observe an
infinite number of white fibres, shining like aponeurotic fibres,
which are detached from this internal surface, form upon it a kind of
new layer, cross each other in all directions, leave between them,
especially towards the heel many spaces of different sizes, that are
filled with fat, separate more and more, and are finally lost in the
sub-cutaneous texture, nearly as the fibres of the brachial aponeurosis
insensibly disappear in the neighbouring cellular texture. Hence why
when we dissect the palmar and plantar integuments, we experience the
greatest difficulty in separating them entirely from the cellular
texture which is interlaced with these fibres; hence why also these
surfaces have not, on the parts which they cover, the mobility which
many others exhibit.

The density of the cellular texture contributes also something to this
arrangement which is essential to the functions of the foot and the
hand, which are designed to seize and grasp external bodies.

2d. The dermis of the superior and inferior extremities of the
back, of the neck, of the thorax, of the abdomen, of the face even
and consequently of almost all the body, is distinguished from the
preceding, because the fibres are much less distinct, and are not
lost in the cellular texture by being as it were confounded with it,
whence arises a remarkable laxity of the skin of these parts, and the
very great facility with which it is dissected; in a word because the
spaces between these fibres are much more narrow. These spaces appear
like an infinite number of holes irregularly placed at the side of each
other, containing most of them small fatty parcels of the neighbouring
texture, and exhibiting, when these small parcels have been carefully
removed, very evident vacuities. The fibres which form them, are
sufficiently near each other, to make you believe at first view, that
it is a surface pierced with an infinite number of holes, that has
been applied under the skin. On the contrary, on the hand and the
foot, towards the heel especially, it is a true net-work the spaces of
which are larger than the fibres that form them; this is the reverse
here. Be that as it may, these spaces in the internal surface of the
chorion are very favourable to the action of tannin which penetrates
the texture infinitely better from this side than from the opposite,
because it insinuates itself into these numerous openings. I have had
occasion to observe it in the human chorion which I have had tanned
for the purpose. Chaptal has observed that the epidermis is a real
obstacle to the action of tannin, and that on this account scraping
is a preliminary operation essential to tanning, since it allows the
skin to be penetrated on both sides; but even when thus scraped, it
receives the tannin much more easily on the side of the flesh than on
the opposite one.

3d. The chorion of the back of the hand and the foot, as well as
that of the forehead does not exhibit these numerous openings on its
internal surface; it is smooth and white, especially when it has been
macerated a little. It is precisely the same as that of the scrotum,
the prepuce and even the great labia. The texture of it is more
compact, no space is left in it, so that though more delicate than that
of the extremities and the trunk, it contains almost as much substance.
As to the chorion corresponding to the hair and the beard, we see in it
only the openings necessary for the passage of the hairs, and which are
wholly different from those of which I spoke just now, which form real
culs-de-sac, and do not pierce through the chorion.

Hence the internal face of the dermoid chorion exhibits three very
distinct modifications. The first and last are seen to a small extent,
whilst the second is almost general, with some differences however in
the trunk, the extremities and the head. Besides, these modifications
do not suppose a diversity of nature, but only of forms. Much separated
and arranged in fibres in the first, the dermoid texture is compact and
condensed a little in the second, and by this condensation renders the
spaces less distinct. But there is a means of seeing them everywhere
very well, where there is the least trace of them, and this is by
maceration. This means also shows the dermoid texture best. In fact,
when the skin has remained for some time in water, it softens, the
fibres of its chorion separate, and their interstices become more
distinct; then we see that the spaces exist not only on the internal
surface, but that they extend into its texture which appears to be
truly like a sieve in its whole thickness, so numerous are the spaces
arising from the interlacing of the fibres.

These spaces do not terminate in culs-de-sac towards the external
surface; they open upon this surface by many foramina which are very
evident in a skin that has been macerated for a month or two, and
which, in the ordinary state are almost imperceptible in some subjects,
and very visible in others. Besides, in order to see them it is
necessary to remove the epidermis; now as with the view of producing
this effect immediately we commonly employ the action of boiling
water or fire, the dermoid texture by this means acquires the horny
hardening, and they become much less apparent, whereas maceration not
only does not produce horny hardening of the skin, but it expands and
dilates it, which renders these foramina very evident. In some parts of
the skin and in certain subjects, we might then introduce the head of
a pin into them; in others they are less evident. These foramina never
pierce the dermis perpendicularly, all open obliquely to its surface;
so that a perpendicular pressure tends to close them and bring their
parietes in contact. I cannot compare their termination better than
to that of the ureters in the bladder; hence why the hairs which go
through them are never perpendicular, but oblique to the skin. We speak
incorrectly when we say that the hairs are planted obliquely; their
insertion in the bulb is perpendicular; it is in their passage through
the chorion that they change direction.

Besides, these foramina are not vessels, but mere communications
from the interior to the exterior through which pass the hairs, the
exhalants, the absorbents, the blood-vessels and the nerves which
go to the surface of the dermis; thus the subjacent spaces are only
cells in which are contained the vessels of the glands and of the
cellular texture. The dermoid texture should then be considered as a
real net-work, as a kind of cellular texture, the cells of which very
evident within, become less so on the exterior surface, with which all
communicate to transmit to it different organs. The chorion is then
the outline, the frame, if I may so say, of the cutaneous organ. It
serves to lodge in its spaces, all the other parts which enter into the
structure of this organ, and contributes to give them the form they are
to have, but is wholly foreign to them.

What is the nature of this texture, which enters especially into the
composition of the cutaneous chorion? I know not; but I think it has
much analogy with the texture of the fibrous system; the following
considerations support this analogy. 1st. On the heel, where the
dermoid texture has the fibrous form of the irregular ligaments, it
would be almost impossible to distinguish it from it, so uniform is
the external appearance; it has the same resistance and density; the
same sensation is experienced when it is cut with the bistoury. 2d.
The dermoid texture becomes yellow and transparent like the fibrous
by stewing. 3d. It melts gradually like it into gelatine. 4th. Like
it, except the tendons however, it strongly resists maceration. 5th.
Sometimes these two textures are identified; for example, the annular
ligaments of the wrist evidently send elongations to the neighbouring
dermoid texture. 6th. This texture can serve, like the fibrous, for the
insertion of muscles; we see it in the face, where many of the fibres
of the orbicularis of the lips and the eyelids, and almost all those of
the eyebrows, find real tendons in the fibres of the dermoid texture.
There is the same arrangement in the cutaneous palmar muscles.

All these considerations evidently establish many relations between the
dermoid and fibrous textures. Yet they are far from being the same. To
be convinced of this it is sufficient to observe how much their mode
of sensibility differs, and how different also are their diseases; it
seems at first as if there was no analogy between them in this double
relation. Yet the line of demarcation is by no means as great as it
appears to be. In fact the acute sensibility of the skin is not seated
precisely in this white texture, which is interwoven so as to leave
between its meshes the spaces of which we have spoken, and which we
see especially on the surface adhering to this organ. The experiment
mentioned in the article on the mucous system, and in which I irritated
the cutaneous organ from within outwards, evidently proves it. It is
the surface on which the papillæ are found that especially exhibits
this vital property.

On the other hand morbid anatomy proves that the internal surface
of the dermis, in which are especially found the texture and the
spaces of which we have spoken, is entirely free from most cutaneous
eruptions. This is no doubt true as it respects the small pox, the
itch and many species of herpes; I have satisfied myself of it as to
the vaccine vesicles, the miliary eruption, &c. &c. It is certain that
in erysipelas, the external surface only of the chorion is coloured
by the blood which enters the exhalants; thus the slightest pressure,
causing the blood to flow back, produces a sudden whiteness which soon
disappears by the return of the blood into the exhalants. It is this
which forms the essential difference between simple erysipelas and
phlegmon, in which not only the external face of the chorion, but its
whole texture and the subjacent cellular one are inflamed. In measles
and scarlatina, the redness is also very evidently superficial. These
phenomena accord with those of injections; for if they succeed at all
in children, the skin of the face and less frequently that of the other
parts, becomes almost entirely black. Now this blackness is much more
evident on the external than the internal surface of the skin, no doubt
because more exhalants are found in the first than in the second, which
the arterial trunks only traverse.

The preceding considerations evidently prove that the texture of the
internal surface of the chorion, and even that of its interior, have a
vital activity much less than that of the external surface; that this
texture is disconnected with all the great phenomena which take place
upon the skin, with those especially which relate to the sensations and
the circulation; that it is in the papillæ that the first are seated
and in the reticular body the second; and that it is almost passive
in nearly all the periods of activity of this double portion of the
dermis. Its functions, like those of the fibrous texture, suppose it
to be almost always in this passive state; they are only to defend the
body and to protect it from the action of external bodies. It is this
which forms our real covering; thus its properties are well adapted
to this use. Its resistance is extreme. It requires very considerable
weight to tear very narrow strips of chorion, when it is suspended from
them; drawn in various directions, these strips are broken also with
much difficulty.

Yet this resistance is much less than when tannin is combined with
the chorion. We know that when thus prepared, this portion of the
skin affords the strongest strings we have in the arts. I know but
two textures in the animal economy, which unite to such an extent
suppleness and resistance; these are this and the fibrous texture; and
this is a new character which approximates them. We have seen that
it requires a very considerable weight to break a tendon, a strip
of aponeurosis, or a ligament taken from a dead body. The muscular,
nervous, arterial, venous, cellular textures, &c. yield infinitely
more easily. If the dermoid texture had less extensibility, it might
advantageously supply the place of the tendons, the ligaments, &c. in
the structure of the body.

Since the chorion is foreign to almost all the sensitive and morbid
phenomena of the skin, let us inquire then in what part of the dermis
these phenomena are seated. These parts exist very evidently on the
external surface; now we find on this surface, 1st, what is called the
reticular body; 2d, the papillæ.


_Of the Reticular Body._

Most authors have considered the reticular body as a kind of layer
applied to the external face of the skin between the chorion and the
epidermis, pierced with an infinite number of openings through which
the papillæ pass. I do not know how we can demonstrate this layer,
which escapes according to the opinion of most of them, when the
epidermis is detached. In order to see it I have employed a great
many means, but no one has succeeded. 1st. Such is the adhesion
of the epidermis to the skin, that in a sound state we can hardly
separate them without injuring one or the other. Yet with the greatest
precaution we see nothing mucous on the chorion when it is laid bare.
2d. A portion of skin cut longitudinally, especially from the foot
where the epidermis is very thick, allows us to see very distinctly on
the divided edge the boundaries of this and of the chorion; now nothing
escapes from about the line which separates them. 3d. In ebullition in
which the epidermis has been removed, nothing remains upon the internal
surface, nor upon the chorion. 4th. Maceration and putrefaction, the
latter especially, produce upon the chorion a kind of glutinous layer
the instant the epidermis is removed. But this layer is entirely the
product of decomposition. Nothing similar is met with in the ordinary
state.

I believe, from all these considerations, that there is not a substance
deposited by the vessels upon the surface of the chorion, extravasated,
stagnant upon this surface, and representing there a layer in the sense
in which Malpighi understood it. I believe that we ought to understand
by the reticular body, a net-work of extremely fine vessels, whose
trunks already very delicate, after having passed through the numerous
pores with which the chorion is perforated, come and ramify upon its
surface, and contain different kinds of fluids.

The existence of this vascular net-work is placed beyond a doubt
by fine injections which change the colour of the skin entirely
externally, without altering it much within. This is, as I have
observed, the principal seat of the numerous eruptions most of which
are really foreign to the cutaneous chorion.

We may then consider the reticular body as a general capillary system,
surrounding the cutaneous organ, and forming with the papillæ a layer
between the chorion and the epidermis. This system contains in most
men, only white fluids. In negroes, these fluids are black. They have
an intermediate tinge in the tawny nations. We know how much the shades
vary in the human race. Hence the colouring of the skin resembles
nearly that of the hairs, which evidently depends upon the substance
existing in their capillary tubes; it is analogous to that of the
marks at birth, that are commonly called nævi materni, and in which we
never see a layer of fluids extravasated between the epidermis and the
chorion.

Moreover, I think we know but little as yet concerning this substance,
which fills a part of the external capillary system. It does not
circulate in it, but appears to remain there till another replaces it.
When we examine the skin of a negro, we see a black teint, and that is
all. In maceration I have observed that this teint is sometimes removed
with the epidermis, and that it sometimes remains adhering to the
chorion. It is very evidently foreign to both, since both have the same
colour in whites as in blacks. It is never reproduced, after it has
been removed; for cicatrices are white in all people.

Is there in white people a white substance which, remaining in the
external capillary system, corresponds to that of negroes, or does the
colour of their skin depend only upon the epidermis and chorion? I
have been tempted to believe that they also have a colouring substance,
since the long-continued action of a powerful sun evidently blackens
them. This circumstance has even made me believe that whiteness is
natural to all men, and that there was but one primitive race which has
degenerated according to different climates.

But in order to be convinced of the diversity of races, it is
sufficient to observe, 1st, that the teint of the skin is but one of
the characters which distinguish each race, and that many others are
always united to it. The nature and form of the hair, the thickness
of the lips and the nose, the width of the forehead, the degree of
inclination of the facial angle, the whole appearance of the face, &c.
are constant attributes which indicate a general modification in the
organization, and not merely a difference of the dermoid system. 2d.
White people become tawny in hot countries; but they never acquire the
teint of the people of the country. 3d. Removed to cold countries in
early age, or even born in them, the blacks always remain so; their
shade hardly changes at all from generation to generation. 4th. Colour
by no means follows temperature exactly; we see many varieties in the
shades of people who live under the same degree of latitude, &c.

Every thing proves then that the colour of the skin is but an insulated
attribute of the different human races, though it is that which is most
striking to our senses, and that we should not attach to it a greater
importance than to many others which are drawn from the stature, which
is oftentimes very small, as in the Laplanders, from the broad and
flat face, as in the Chinese, from the dimensions of the chest, of the
pelvis, the extremities, &c. It is from the differences of the whole,
and not from those of an insulated part, that the lines of demarcation
should be made which separate the races. The European face and forms
are in general the type with which we compare the exterior of the
other nations. The ugliness or beauty of the human races are, in our
way of considering it, measured by the distance which separates these
races from ours. Such is in fact the force of habit with us, that we
rarely judge in an absolute manner, and that every object which is much
removed from those to which we are accustomed, is disagreeable to us
and sometimes even disgusting.

Besides, the colouring matter of the cutaneous reticular body is more
interesting to the naturalist than to the physician. What should
particularly arrest the attention of the latter is the portion of the
capillary system exterior to the skin in which the fluids circulate.
In fact, besides the portion which is the seat of colour, there
is evidently another that the white fluids constantly pervade, in
which they are moved with more or less rapidity, and in which they
continually succeed each other. It is from this portion that the
exhalant pores arise which furnish the sweat; it is this vascular
net-work which is the seat of erysipelas and of all the cutaneous
eruptions that are foreign to the chorion.

The blood does not penetrate it in an ordinary state, but a thousand
causes can at every instant fill it with this fluid. Rub the skin
briskly, and it reddens in a moment. If an irritant is applied to
it, whether it acts mechanically like nettles, the appendices of
which penetrate the epidermis, or exerts a chemical action, like the
frictions with ammonia, or the action of fire when a portion of skin is
held too near it, instantly the sensibility of this vascular net-work
is raised; it invites into it the blood which it formerly repelled;
every part of a surface reddens in proportion to the irritation. If
passion acts powerfully upon the cheeks, immediately a sudden redness
is evident in them. All rubefacients exhibit moreover a proof of the
great tendency which the sensibility of the superficial capillary
system of the dermis has to place itself, if it be ever so little
excited, in relation with the blood which in the ordinary state is
foreign to it.

Vesicatories depend upon the same principle. Their first effect is to
fill with blood the cutaneous capillary system, where they are applied,
to produce in it a sudden erysipelas, and then to occasion a copious
serous exhalation under the raised epidermis. They effect in a few
hours what most cases of erysipelas do in many days; for we know that
most of them terminate by vesicles which are raised above the skin.
In burning, carried sufficiently far to be more than a rubefacient,
and yet not so as to produce the horny hardening, there is also a
sudden increase of exhalation under the raised epidermis. In general
the production of every cutaneous bladder is always preceded by an
inflammation of the external surface of the skin. This phenomenon is
not exclusively confined to this system. We have seen the serous, as
soon as it is laid bare and irritated considerably, redden in a short
time by the passage of the blood into its exhalants; which constitutes
an inflammation to which often succeeds a copious exhalation of milky
or other kind of serum. This exhalation does not remain upon the
surface, and does not form vesicles there, because it has no epidermis;
this is the only difference between these phenomena, which at first
view do not appear to be the same in the serous and cutaneous systems.

It is not only the irritation of the cutaneous organ which makes the
blood pass into the external capillary system. Whenever the heart is
powerfully excited and it accelerates the course of this fluid, it
always tends to go into it; this is what is evidently seen, 1st, after
violent running; 2d, in the hot period of a paroxysm of fever.

Upon this subject I will make a remark which appears to me to be very
important; it is that the capillary system of the face is, more than
that of all the other parts of the skin, exposed to be thus penetrated
with blood. 1st. This is evident in the two cases of which I have just
spoken, and in which the action of the heart is increased. 2d. In the
passions, the skin remains the same in the other parts, whilst that
of the face suddenly becomes pale or red. 3d. We know that physicians
frequently examine the state of the facial capillary system, which is
almost always affected by the state of the internal viscera, and is
full of blood or empty, according as it is sympathetically influenced.
4th. In various kinds of asphyxia, in those especially produced by
submersion, by the vapour of charcoal, by strangulation, &c. the face
is uniformly of a violet colour from the passage of the black blood
into its external capillary system, into which it is brought by the
arteries. Oftentimes the neck and the upper part of the chest are also
livid; but there is never a discoloration of the inferior parts. 5th.
In many diseases, in which death takes place by a kind of asphyxia,
because the lungs are the first interrupted, the dead bodies have a
violet-coloured and swollen face; this may be easily observed by all
who frequent dissecting rooms. There are a hundred subjects in which
the head has this lividity, to one in which it is observed in the
inferior parts. 6th. Most cases of apoplexy produce the same lividity
of the face.

To what is this extreme susceptibility of the facial capillary
system to admit the blood owing? Three things, I think, principally
contribute to it. 1st. The course is already opened to this fluid,
since the redness of the cheeks necessarily supposes its presence in
them, it only increases in quantity; whereas when another part of the
dermoid surface becomes red, all the blood which enters it is almost
accidental. 2d. The anatomical arrangement of the capillary system is
more favourable to this passage there than elsewhere; for it appears
that the communications of this system with the arteries of the chorion
are more free. What proves this is, that in injections the face is
coloured with great ease. There is undoubtedly no anatomist who has
not been struck with this phenomenon, especially in children, in whom
if the coarse injections of our dissecting rooms succeed at all, the
face becomes wholly black, whilst the fluid penetrates but very little
into the other parts of the cutaneous system. 3d. It appears that
there is a greater sensibility in the face; in fact the same irritant
brings blood there, which does not make it flow to any other place. For
example, a blow equal to a box on the ear does not redden the skin of
the arm, whilst it suddenly inflames the cheeks.

The blood disappears from the facial capillary system as it enters
it; in an instant the passions will successively produce there the
bright red of a paroxysm of fever, the whiteness of syncope and all the
intermediate shades. It is even the extreme ease with which this fluid
penetrates this system, that renders the face well adapted to serve as
a kind of picture, which the passions paint by turns with a thousand
shades, that are effaced, altered, modified and return again according
to the state of the mind.

I would observe upon this subject that the passions have in the face
three means of expression; 1st, the capillary system, a means wholly
involuntary, and which often betrays what we wish to conceal; 2d, the
muscular motion, which, by contracting or expanding the features,
expresses the melancholy or gay emotions, and to which belongs as
effects, the various wrinkles of which we have spoken; 3d, the state
of the eye, an organ, which, as Buffon has remarked, not only receives
the sensations, but also expresses the passions. The two last means are
to a certain extent voluntary; we can at least disguise them; whereas
we cannot deceive by the first. The actor imitates anger, joy, &c.
because we can give these passions by contracting the eye-brows, by
dilating the face in laughing, &c. But it is the rouge of the actress
that imitates modest chastity; it is by removing this rouge that she
imitates the paleness of fear, horror, &c.

I will add another essential observation in respect to the facial
capillary system; it is that it appears that its tendency to receive
blood, disposes it to become the more frequent seat of many affections.
We know, 1st, that erysipelas is much more frequent in this than in
other parts; 2d, that the variolous pustules are remarkably conspicuous
here; 3d, that many eruptions are more abundant here than elsewhere.

From all that we have just said, it is evident that it is necessary
to distinguish two portions in the capillary system exterior to the
chorion. 1st. One is constantly filled with the colouring substance of
the skin, a substance which appears to be stagnant like that of the
hair of the head, and that of the hair of the body, which is subjected
only to the slow and insensible motion of composition and decomposition
and which never exhibits that sudden increase or diminution of which we
have just spoken. 2d. The second is constantly pervaded by many fluids
which continually succeed each other there, and which constantly escape
by transpiration, and which are replaced by the blood, that insinuates
itself into this portion of the capillary system. These two portions
are entirely independent, and have probably no kind of communication.

It appears that at the instant of death there remains a certain
quantity of the white fluids in the second portion of the exterior
capillary system; the following experiment, which I have frequently
made, proves it; by plunging a portion of skin into boiling water, and
leaving it there an instant, the epidermis is raised up, not as a whole
as in a blister, but in an infinite number of small vesicles which are
formed suddenly on its surface, and which contain a serous fluid, that
escapes as soon as we open these vesicles.


_Papillæ._

We call by this name those small eminences that arise from the external
surface of the chorion, and which, piercing the capillary net-work
of which we have just spoken, become by their extremities contiguous
to the epidermis. These eminences are very evident in the palm of the
hand and the sole of the foot, where they are regularly arranged, in
the form of small curved striæ in different directions. We see them
through the epidermis, notwithstanding its thickness in these places.
But they are seen especially when this has been in any way removed,
as by maceration, ebullition, &c. If we cut longitudinally a portion
of the chorion of the foot, with its epidermis adhering to it, we see
between them along the divided edge, a line in the form of a curved
thread, which arises from these small eminences placed at the side of
each other.

In some other parts of the skin, we distinguish the papillæ in a very
evident manner; but in a great number, the epidermis being removed,
we see only a surface, slightly uneven from some small eminences,
especially towards the orifices through which the hairs and the vessels
pass, but we do not discover those regularly arranged eminences, the
papillæ properly so called.

We must not mistake for them the numerous and very evident prominences,
which render the skin of some subjects extremely rough. These
prominences are formed by small cellular, vascular or nervous bunches,
by sebaceous glands, &c. which are found near the small openings by
which the chorion opens under the epidermis, and usually transmits the
hairs. These bunches, lodged in the small oblique canals which are
terminated by these openings, raise the external side of them and thus
form this prominence. The following very curious experiment proves
this arrangement; when the skin is macerated for two or three months,
or even less, on the one hand these little bunches in which there
is almost always a little fat, are changed into that white, thick,
unctuous matter, analogous to spermaceti, into which fat kept a long
time in water is always converted; and on the other, the foramina
enlarging, as we have seen, and the skin changing into a kind of pulp,
we can easily remove it all around these little prominences, and see
that they are continued with the fat which fills the meshes of the
subjacent chorion, and which is also changed into a hard matter.

Injections have evidently proved to me that there were vessels in
these cellular bunches, and I have been convinced of it for some time
past by the dissection of some subjects that died of scurvy, in whom
the spots commenced by very small ecchymoses, similar as it were to
flea-bites, and which occupied these little eminences. The petechiæ
of adynamic fevers have a different appearance; but they belong also
to an extravasation of blood in the cellular texture, occupying the
small pores which open on the exterior of the chorion to transmit the
vessels, the hairs, &c. The more prominent these eminences are, of
which we have spoken, the more uneven is the skin. In general they are
more frequent on the extremities and on the back, than on the anterior
part of the trunk. In the extremities there are more of them in the
direction of extension, than in that of flexion.

We attach the idea of a beautiful skin, to that in which these small
tubercles are not found, and in which the chorion is united at its
external surface. Women have commonly this last arrangement more
evident than men. The epidermis which covers these eminences very
often scales off at that place, especially from strong friction, which
contributes still more to render the skin uneven, rough and harsh to
the touch where they exist, which might induce a belief that they are
formed by it, though it is always only accessory to them. Where it
is very thick, as in the palm of the hand and the sole of the foot,
it cannot be raised, and these small cutaneous tubercles are never
seen. In the face where many vessels pass from within outwards, by the
little pores of which we have spoken, we meet with hardly any more of
them. The papillæ scattered among these eminences, are in general very
slightly apparent in the places where they exist.

All anatomists attribute to these last a nervous structure; they regard
them as the termination of all the nerves that go to the skin, and
which, according to them, are expanded to form these, after having
first left their external covering. Some even say that they have traced
filaments even into the papillæ; I confess that I have never been able
to do it. In the ordinary state, the density of the chorion and the
extreme delicacy of the filaments, are evidently an obstacle to it. In
the state of long continued maceration, in which the chorion becomes
pulpy and in which we might consequently trace these filaments, were
it ever possible, it cannot be done. I do not however deny the texture
attributed to the papillæ. The acute sensibility of the skin seems even
to suppose it; but it is only analogy and not demonstration, which
establishes this anatomical fact; indeed all the other senses, whose
organs are so sensible, have the portion of them which receives the
impression of bodies continuous with a nerve.


_Action of different bodies upon the Dermoid Texture._

In most of the other textures, we have only considered this action in
the dead body, because during life, these textures always removed from
external bodies, cannot be influenced by them. Here we can regard it in
a double relation, since the skin is incessantly in contact with almost
all the bodies of nature.


_Action of Light._

Light evidently acts upon the dermis. Removed from its influence, men
are blanched, if we may so say, like plants. Compare the inhabitant
of a city, who is never exposed to the influence of the sun, with
the peasant who constantly is, and you will see the difference. It
appears that it is the light and not the heat which produces the effect
of which I have already spoken; for individuals who live in a warm
temperature, but removed from the solar light, become white like those
of cold countries. Thus we know that some men who keep their chambers
always very hot, are whiter than others who, living in a less hot
atmosphere, are constantly exposed to the sun. We might remain forever
in a bath of a temperature equal to the warmest seasons, and the skin
would not blacken. Apartments for study which are warmed with stoves,
and in which men remain as long as the labourer at his plough, are as
warm as the atmosphere of summer, and yet the skin of those who occupy
them never becomes darker. Besides an irresistible proof is that the
clothing which does not prevent the action of caloric upon the skin,
and which offers a barrier to the rays of light only, prevents the
cutaneous colouring that takes place upon the parts which the light
immediately strikes, as upon the hands, the face, &c.

I do not speak of the solar influence upon the vital forces of the
skin, as in cases in which sun-strokes produce erysipelas, or as when
light is employed medicinally to recall the life of a part; but it is
only in relation to the dermoid texture that I consider its action.


_Action of Caloric._

The action of caloric upon the skin exhibits very different phenomena,
according to the degree of it that it is applied.

1st. A warm atmosphere expands the dermoid texture, increases its
action, and makes most of the fluids which form the residue of
nutrition and digestion, pass off by the exhalants.

2d. When contracted by cold, this texture refuses to admit those
fluids, which then go off principally by the urine.

3d. The insensible change from one to the other of these two states,
does not disturb the functions. When this change is sudden, there are
almost always alterations in different organs, because the fluids
destined to pass out, cannot vary their direction as rapidly towards
this or that organ, as the cutaneous excitement produced by the sudden
changes from heat to cold.

4th. The skin resists a temperature much greater than that of the body;
it opposes an insurmountable barrier to the external caloric, which
tends to an equilibrium in animate as well as inanimate bodies. Thus
whilst these last are penetrated with this fluid in a medium warmer
than themselves, and soon acquire the temperature of this medium,
living bodies remain at the same degree, how much greater soever the
surrounding heat may be to their own. The curious experiments of
the English physicians have placed this truth, as it respects man,
beyond a doubt. It is unnecessary to give the detail of these well
known experiments, in which the mercury was seen to descend in the
thermometer, when the bulb was placed in the mouth and in which the
skin became covered, in a heated room, with the aqueous vapours of the
air, which the greater cold of the body condensed upon its surface. A
slight attention to animals with cold blood, living in warm climates,
proves the same thing. I will make one remarkable observation upon this
point, it is, that most reptiles, whose temperature is much less than
that of the mammalia and of birds, and who consequently are brought
much nearer than them to the temperature of winter, cannot however
support it. They become torpid and sleep in subterraneous places, the
heat of which remains nearly uniform like that of cellars, and do not
awake till the milder temperature of spring stimulates them.

5th. The skin, in very cold climates, seems to be on the other hand an
obstacle which prevents the internal caloric from suddenly escaping and
thus placing the body in equilibrium with the surrounding medium. This
is evident in countries near the pole. Upon this subject an observation
the reverse of the preceding can be made; it is that the cetaceous
animals inhabit seas the temperature of which is most unlike their
own. Whales are sought for especially in the latitudes of Greenland,
Spitzbergen, &c. Why do fishes with warm blood delight in the frozen
seas, whilst the amphibious animals with cold blood prefer the burning
heat of the sun? I know not.

Let us observe that most of the internal organs when exposed in
solutions of continuity, have not the faculty of preserving as well as
the skin, a degree of independent temperature. They become cold or hot
sooner than it as long as they remain healthy. The intestine brought
out of the abdomen in the operation for hernia, a muscle laid bare, &c.
&c. exhibit this phenomenon; thus in order to give them this faculty of
having an independent temperature, nature inflames them, and they thus
constantly preserve their heat, whatever may be that of the surrounding
medium. The mucous surfaces next to the skin resist the surrounding
temperature the most, as is seen in prolapsus of the rectum, in
inversion of the anus, &c. This difference among the different systems
is probably owing to that of their structure.

6th. When the action of caloric is carried to a very considerable
extent, it begins to act upon the skin, and its effects are the more
evident in proportion as it is the more intense. 1st. The slightest of
these effects is to produce an evident redness, a kind of erysipelas;
the caloric then acts like a simple rubefacient. 2d. The second is to
redden the skin and then to produce vesicles on it. 3d. In the third
there is a real horny hardening, a crisping of the fibres of the
chorion which contract, like those of all the animal textures exposed
to too strong a degree of heat. 4th. In the fourth and last effect,
the dermoid texture is burnt, blackened and reduced to mere carbon.
These different degrees of burning arise only from different degrees of
caloric. I would observe that in the two first effects, this fluid acts
upon the vital forces, and that these two effects cannot consequently
take place except during life. The two last are exerted only upon the
texture of the organ; thus they take place after death precisely as
before. Cooks often employ the horny hardness, to give to the skin a
hardness and brittleness necessary in some kinds of cooking.

7th. Cold carried to a great degree acts also upon the cutaneous organ,
and produces different effects, according to its intensity. The first
of these effects is very analogous to the first effect of a slight
degree of caloric. It consists of a kind of local inflammation. The
tip of the nose, the ears and the fingers, the cheeks, &c. become red
from a slight degree of cold. I have not accurately observed the other
effects between this and the last, which consists in a sudden privation
of life. But there is this difference between the gangrene that then
takes place, and that produced by a high degree of caloric, that the
blackness is sudden in this last, whereas it takes place only as a
consequence in the other. Observe in fact that there is in gangrene
two things which physicians do not sufficiently distinguish, 1st, the
mortification of the part; 2d, its putrefaction. The mortification
is always antecedent; it is produced by a thousand different causes;
sometimes by the ligature of an artery, as in aneurism; sometimes
by that of a nerve; often by violent inflammation; sometimes by a
contusion, attrition, a bruise, &c. Whenever a part is dead in the
midst of those which live, whatever may be the cause of its death, it
becomes putrid precisely like a dead body, every part of which life has
left. Putrefaction takes place then even sooner, because on the one
hand the natural heat of the body, and on the other the moisture of
the surrounding parts, favour it remarkably. This putrefaction varies
according to the state in which the part was at the instant of death.
If much blood infiltrated it, as when inflammation destroys life, it
quickly becomes putrid, blackens immediately and allows a fetid sanies
to escape; this putrefaction is called moist. If there is but little
blood in the part at the instant of death, its putrefaction is less
sudden; it first putrifies, then blackens, and allows but little sanies
to escape; this is the dry gangrene. Thus in a dead body, if one part
is much loaded with blood, as the head of those that have died of
apoplexy, its putrefaction is much more rapid and moist than that of
the parts in which this fluid is less abundant. In the gangrene which
succeeds mortification produced by cold, there is often dryness of the
part, because there was but little blood in it at death. How little
many physicians know of the progress of nature in the employment of
antiseptics, which they apply in the living economy, as upon flesh
without life. Antiseptics are applied for one of two purposes, either
to prevent the death of the part, or its putrefaction. 1st. If it is
with the first intention, antiseptics should be varied. By untying the
artery of a limb of an animal that has been tied, you will perform
an antiseptic operation. Bleeding and emollient applications which
lessen the violence of inflammation in a phlegmon, are antiseptics.
A tonic as wine and all stimulants which excite the vital forces in
a part in which they are languid after a bruise, are antiseptics.
This word is then extremely improper when it is applied to medicines
designed to prevent the mortification of the parts. Antiseptics are
employed to prevent a dead part in the midst of living ones becoming
putrid; some effect is obtained; thus by sprinkling cinchona, muriate
of soda, or any neutral salt, by moistening a limb, a portion of skin,
the extremity of the nose, &c. which is dead from any cause, the
putrefaction will be arrested, as in a dead body upon which the same
means are employed. But what will be the result of it? a little less
fetor in the surrounding parts and less danger of their receiving
the influence of the emanations of the dead part; but it is always
necessary that this should come off; antiseptics will never bring it
to life. Hence it is evident that these means should be considered in
two points of view entirely different. The first prevent mortification,
and vary remarkably though they are designed to effect the same
object; thus our means of curing retention of urine are very variable,
oftentimes opposite, according to the cause which tends to produce this
retention. The others prevent putrefaction, without restoring the parts
to life; now these are uniformly the same, whatever may have been the
cause of the local death.


_Action of the Air._

The air acts incessantly upon the cutaneous organ. In the ordinary
state, it constantly removes from its surface the sweat that is exhaled
from it. Fourcroy, who has paid particular attention to the solution
of the transpired fluid by the surrounding air, appears to me to have
allowed too much influence to this solution upon transpiration. In
fact there are two very distinct things in this function; 1st, the
action of the exhalants which throw out the fluid; 2d, the action of
the air which dissolves and evaporates it. Now the first of these is
wholly independent of the other. Whether the fluid is dissolved or not,
more is still furnished by the exhalants. If the solution does not
take place, the fluid accumulates upon the skin, which remains moist;
but this moisture does not obstruct the exhalant pores and prevent
new moisture from being added to it. A comparison will render this
very evident. In the natural state, the serous fluids are constantly
exhaled and absorbed; the absorbents perform for them the functions
of the air which dissolves the sweat; now, though these vessels cease
to act, as in dropsies, the exhalants continue their action; there
arises only a serous collection, which, though applied to the orifices
of the exhalants, does not prevent them from pouring out more serum.
The bladder in vain contains urine which presses upon the opening of
the ureters, these ducts do not pour less into it. Though the mucous
juices become stagnant on their respective surfaces, new juices are
however poured upon these surfaces. So though the skin remains moist
from the want of solution of the transpiration, more transpiration is
nevertheless exhaled. Solution is a physical phenomenon wholly foreign
to the vital phenomenon of exhalation. We transpire in a bath as well
as in the air; only the fluid which arises from it is mixed with the
water, instead of being reduced to vapour.

The moisture of the skin is owing to two causes wholly foreign to each
other; 1st, to the increase of the fluid furnished by the cutaneous
exhalants; now the action of these exhalants may be increased from
three causes. First, every thing which accelerates the motion of the
heart, as running, the paroxysm of acute fevers, &c. drives to the
skin, as it is commonly expressed. In the second place, every thing
which tends to relax and expand the cutaneous organ by a direct action
exerted upon it by the surrounding bodies, increases also the action of
these exhalants, as in the great heat of summer, as in a bath and after
coming out, as in a heated room, &c. In the third place, the action
of the skin is in many cases, sympathetically increased. Here may be
classed the sweats of phthisis of which the lungs are the source; those
of fear, which depend upon a sudden affection of an epigastric organ;
those of many acute diseases, &c. Now in all these cases, however
active the solution by the air may be, the skin will be constantly
moist, because there is thrown out upon it more fluid than the air can
dissolve. Thus in catarrhs of the lungs, in which more mucous juices
are thrown into the bronchia than the air can remove, it is absolutely
necessary that there should be cough and expectoration to carry off the
remainder.

2d. There are cases in which the moisture of the skin arises from the
solution not being sufficient. This is what takes place in the moisture
of the bed in which the air is not changed, in damp weather, &c.
There is not then more fluid exhaled; but the ordinary fluid becomes
evident, because it is not dissolved. It is under this point of view
that we must consider the action of the air upon the cutaneous organ
which transpires. It carries off nothing in this organ; it has no real
action upon it; it takes only what its vessels throw off. Solution
is merely accessory, it is always subsequent to exhalation, and has
no relation with it. In the same day, in which the temperature has
remained the same, the skin is often dry, moist, humid and even wet
with sweat. If the air acts upon transpiration, it is by contracting
or relaxing the exhalants, and not by dissolving what they throw out.
If the skin formed a sac without an opening, like the serous surfaces,
transpiration would go on though it was removed from the contact of the
air, the same as if in contact with it. Why in fact should not that
take place there, which does upon these surfaces?

If we consider the action of the air upon the skin of the dead body,
we see that it produces two different effects, according to the state
of the body. If the air penetrates the skin on all sides, it dries it,
and it then acquires a sort of transparency, like the fibrous organs,
unless a large quantity of blood had been accumulated in it at the
moment of death, in which case it becomes black or of a deep brown.
Thus dried, 1st, it is firm and resisting, but can be bent in various
directions without breaking, as is the case with many textures thus
dried, as the cartilaginous, the muscular, &c. &c. 2d. It is much less
easily altered than most of the other textures in a dried state. 3d. It
absorbs moisture less easily than them, though however when immersed
for a long time in water, it finally resumes nearly its original colour
and loses its transparency. 4th. It does not exhale a very disagreeable
odour, like many of the other textures. Hence why the skins of animals,
merely dried, are used in many of the arts; why some barbarous people
make use of them for clothing, &c. The aponeuroses, and the mucous,
serous and fibrous membranes could not be thus employed. It is to this
also that must be attributed the little alteration that takes place in
the exterior of mummies, which would never last for ages, if clothed
with a fleshy or serous covering.

When the skin is left upon the dead body, or exposed to a moist air, it
becomes putrid instead of drying. Then it takes at first a dull colour,
then a green and finally a black one. It exhales a very great fetor,
swells and thickens, because the gases which are disengaged there fill
the cellular texture in its little spaces. A mucous covering is spread
upon its external surface, which is deprived of its epidermis. Nothing
similar to this covering is seen on the internal surface. Finally,
when all the fluids it contains are evaporated, there remains a black
residuum, very different from that which is left after combustion.


_Action of Water._

This action during life, is relative either to the substances that
are deposited on the surface of the skin, or to the cutaneous texture
itself.

The sweat deposits incessantly upon the epidermis many substances, the
principal of which are taken away by the air, but many being slightly
soluble in it, as the salts for example, remain on its surface, and
adhere to it when not removed by friction. Mixed with the unctuous
fluid which oozes out upon this surface, and with the different
foreign particles that the air deposits there as everywhere else,
these substances form upon the skin a deposit which cannot, like the
transpiration, be carried off by solution. Now water removes all this
deposit; hence why the use of baths is truly natural. All quadrupeds
bathe themselves. All birds frequently plunge into the water; I do
not speak of those for whom this fluid is as it were the element. It
is a law imposed upon all species of animals whose skin throws out a
considerable quantity of fluid. All the human races hitherto observed
frequently plunge into brooks, rivers, or lakes, along which they
take up their abode. The countries that are well watered are those
which animals prefer. They avoid those where this fluid is wanting, or
in which it is only sufficient for their drink. We oppose nature in
every thing in society. In our own, numerous classes hardly ever use
a bath; thus you must seek especially in these classes for cutaneous
diseases. We have seen that the mucous juices, remaining too long upon
their surfaces, irritate and stimulate them and cause there various
affections. Is it astonishing that the residuum of the cutaneous
exhalation which the air does not remove, should occasion various
alterations upon the skin? In summer, baths are more necessary, because
as many excretions are taking place by the skin, more substances are
deposited there. In winter, in which every thing passes off by the
urine, the cutaneous surface becomes less dirty, and has less need
of being cleansed. After severe diseases, in which there has been
copious cutaneous evacuations, one or two baths terminate the treatment
advantageously. Let us consider water then as acting as accessory to
the air upon the skin, as removing from its surface substances which
the first cannot dissolve, substances, which varying remarkably like
those that compose the urine, have presented the transpiratory fluids
to chemists, sometimes as alkaline, sometimes as acid, oftentimes as
containing salts, sometimes charged with odoriferous substances, &c.
Water is the general vehicle; when it is evaporated, it leaves the
substances that are not volatilized like it. It is on this account that
dry frictions are also advantageous; they clean the exterior of the
body.

As to the action of the bath upon the cutaneous texture, we know but
little of it during life. They say in medicine that it softens, relaxes
and unbends this texture; this is vague language to which no precise
meaning is attached, and which is no doubt borrowed from the relaxation
which the skin of dead bodies undergoes, or even tanned leather, when
exposed to water. A bath acts upon the vital forces of the skin, raises
or diminishes them, as I shall say; but it leaves its texture in the
same state; it is only that of the epidermis which it alters, as we
shall see.

Macerated in water of a moderate degree of temperature, in that of
cellars for example which does not vary, the human skin softens, swells
but little, becomes evidently whiter, and remains for a long time
without experiencing any other alteration than that of a putrefaction
infinitely less than that of the muscular, glandular, mucous textures,
&c. subjected to the same experiment. This putrefaction, which removes
the epidermis, appears to be much greater on the side nearest to this
membrane; at the end of two or three months the skin loses but little
of its consistence. It does not become pulpy as the tendons and muscles
in this length of time when macerated; it does not become a fetid pulp
till the end of three or four months. I have preserved some of it for
eight months, which has still its primitive form, but which feels
liquid under the fingers when pressed a little. In the half putrid
state, the skin still preserves the faculty of crisping from the action
of caloric; it moves about when placed on burning coals, or when
plunged into boiling water. When once reduced to a really putrid state
it loses this property.

Exposed to ebullition, the dermoid texture when well separated from
the cellular, furnishes less scum than the muscular, the glandular and
the mucous; it resembles in this respect the tendons, no doubt because
being almost wholly gelatinous, it contains but little albumen. In the
horny hardening that takes place a little before ebullition commences,
it twists and then always becomes convex on the side of the epidermis,
and concave on the opposite side; and for this reason; the fibres of
the chorion in contracting by the horny hardening, are pressed against
each other; all the spaces which exist between them are effaced; now,
as these spaces are very large in the second direction, the dermoid
texture necessarily becomes more contracted there, whilst in the first,
the spaces hardly existing at all, every thing being almost solid,
the fibres have less space to contract, they remain longer, and the
surface continues larger. In the natural state the cavity of these
spaces, being filled with cellular texture, increases the extent of the
internal surface; this space then disappearing, this surface becomes
contracted.

The moment this kind of twisting takes place upon the skin, it is
covered, as I have said, with an infinite number of vesicles filled
with serum, and which are formed by the epidermis. As this membrane
is very thick on the soles of the feet, and the palms of the hands,
it cannot contribute in those places to their formation, and we see
nothing there similar to them. Yet by removing it from feet that have
been boiled, I have observed that it contained between its layers
many small vesicles, which were scarcely visible. I have not analyzed
the water of these vesicles, but presume it is analogous to that of
blisters. Besides a greater or less quantity of it is poured out, and
the vesicles are consequently larger or smaller, according to the
state of the external capillary system at the instant of death.

By the horny hardening, the skin becomes hard, elastic, very resisting,
thicker, but not so broad. It soon loses its semi-transparency and
yellowish colour, like the boiled fibrous organs. Then the hardness
it had acquired at the instant of the horny hardening is gradually
lost; it softens, gives out much gelatine in the water in which it
is boiled, does not lessen in size, but even increases in thickness.
Every kind of fibre, vacant space and organization is then gone; it
is a membranous mass, homogeneous in appearance, semi-transparent and
gelatinous. In this soft state, it does not lose the elasticity it had
acquired in the horny hardening, like the mucous, serous, cellular
textures, &c. &c. The great quantity of gelatine it contains still
preserves this property in it. The least motion that is communicated to
it produces a general trembling, a sort of vibration of all its parts,
exactly analogous to that of the various kinds of animal jellies, half
coagulated, which vacillate in the vessel from the least jar.

Finally, the ebullition still continuing, the gelatine is almost all
dissolved, and there remains only a residuum like membrane and which
disappears with great difficulty; it requires even a very long time
for common boiling water to reduce the skin to this residuum. Such are
the phenomena of the ebullition of the human skin as I have carefully
observed them. Chemists have paid great attention to the dermoid
texture of many other animals; they have formed different ideas of its
nature; they have admitted that there are two substances in it; one
fibrous and the other gelatinous. I refer to their works upon this
point, particularly to the labours of Seguin, and the work of Fourcroy;
for in general I do not relate what is detailed by others, it would be
only a useless repetition.


_Action of the Acids, the Alkalies and other Substances._

The sulphuric, nitric and muriatic acids act upon the skin, when in
contact with it, as upon all the other animal substances. I have
remarked however that their action is much slower, especially on the
side of the epidermis, though this membrane may have been previously
taken off. The first of these acids reduces it easily to a blackish
pulp; the others bring it to a pulpy state with more difficulty, even
when they are very little weakened; the oxy-muriatic acid produces
hardly any effect upon it.

Some authors have said that the lapis infernalis produces the same
phenomena on the dead as on the living body. I wrapped up in a piece
of skin, as in a rag, many fragments of this substance, so that they
were in contact with the epidermis; at the end of a day they were
reduced to a kind of pap of a yellowish red, by the moisture which they
had absorbed. The dermoid texture, crisped and contracted, had not
been penetrated; it did not appear even to have been injured on the
exterior. In general the action of the alkalies appears to be wholly
different during life, and it varies even according to the different
degrees of vitality. We know that flaccid and fungous flesh burns
much less easily than that which is red and vigorous. It is the same
with the acids. Never during life do they produce any thing analogous
to that pulp of different colours according to the acids that are
employed, which is always after death the result of their action.

We know that an alkaline solution, put in contact with the skin,
produces a kind of unctuous and slippery feel, which is no doubt owing
to the combination of the alkali with the oily deposit of the skin,
from which arises a sort of soap.

I shall not speak of the tendency of the dermis to combine with tannin,
nor of the phenomena of this combination; I should only be able to
repeat what others have said upon this point. I will merely remark
that it would be very important to try the effects of tannin on the
large sub-cutaneous aponeuroses, the texture of which being essentially
gelatinous has much analogy with that of the dermis, and which from
their extent and delicacy might serve for uses to which the dermoid
texture when tanned is less adapted. We know that the tanned skin is no
longer what it was in the natural state, and that the substance with
which it is then penetrated gives it an artificial consistence. If much
tannin has been combined with it, it loses entirely the faculty of
acquiring the horny hardness, and becomes brittle; whilst if but little
of this substance is added to it, it preserves in part its suppleness
and the property of crisping from the action of caloric. I would
compare tanned skin to bone penetrated with the phosphate of lime, and
that which is not tanned, to the cartilaginous parenchyma from which
the acids have removed this phosphate.


II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Dermoid System. Cellular
Texture._

The whole dermis is penetrated with a large quantity of this texture.
It is arranged in the following way; from the exterior of the
sub-cutaneous cellular layer, an infinite number of elongations is
detached which penetrate the contiguous spaces of the chorion, enter
afterwards into those which are more exterior, and finally terminate
in the numerous pores which transmit outwards the vessels, the nerves
and the hairs, which have previously passed through this cellular
texture. We can then consider the chorion as a kind of sponge, the
spaces of which represent the interstices, and which the cellular
texture penetrates on all sides; so that if it was possible to separate
by dissection, these spaces from the cellular texture, and the
organs which are in it, there would be a kind of sieve pierced in all
directions. Art cannot arrive at it but with difficulty on account of
the delicacy of the parts; but that which is not done by dissection,
nature often effects. In biles I have observed that all that which
fills the interstices of the dermoid fibres disappears by suppuration,
and that these fibres, separated besides by the swelling of the parts,
exhibit truly the appearance of a sieve of which I have just spoken,
when the fluid that moistens them is removed. The bile differs in
fact from many other cutaneous eruptions, in this that it attacks the
cellular texture of the spaces of the chorion, whilst they have their
seat, as I have said, in the reticular body. I do not know any acute
affection which attacks the chorion itself; all have their seat either
on its surface, or in the cellular texture of its cells. Its dense
and compact texture seems, like that of the aponeuroses, not able to
be changed until a length of time. In elephantiasis I have seen this
texture evidently disorganized.

M. Thillaye showed me portions of skin taken from a cemetery, in which
every thing that filled the dermoid spaces had disappeared, and in
which these spaces and their dried fibres formed a real membranous
sponge through which the light could everywhere be seen. In this case
the reverse of what is seen in long continued macerations had taken
place, in which the fatty cellular texture, changed into a solid, white
substance, preserves, as I have said, the form of the spaces which
it filled, whilst the dermoid fibres reduced to the pulpy state, are
easily removed. In the first case it is the mould only which is left;
in the second it is the substance which is contained in it.

In chronic leucophlegmasia, the sub-cutaneous serum gradually extends
along the cellular elongations of the spaces of the dermis, separates
their fibres, consequently enlarges these spaces, and sometimes
penetrates even to the epidermis, which it breaks in different places,
and through the crevices of which it escapes. In this case, there is
not resolution of the skin into cellular texture, as it is called, but
a separation of the dermoid fibres, which always remain.

I do not presume that the cellular texture of the chorion extends to
its external surface, under the epidermis; for when this has been
removed, fleshy granulations are not formed, now, in all the parts
where the cellular texture is found, these granulations are produced,
when the parts are laid bare.


_Blood Vessels._

The arteries winding in the sub-cutaneous cellular texture, furnish
an infinite number of small branches which are introduced with the
cellular parcels into the most internal dermoid spaces, afterwards pass
into those that are nearer, approximate by winding and anastomosing
a thousand times through the spaces of the external surface of the
chorion, finally go through the pores of this surface, and give rise to
that external capillary net-work of which we have spoken in the article
upon the reticular body, and to which in the ordinary state but very
little red blood comes. In this course through the dermoid spaces, but
few small arteries remain in the fibres of the chorion itself, as fine
injections prove. These fibres resemble in this respect those of the
aponeuroses through which many vessels pass, but which have but few
belonging to their own texture.

The veins follow nearly the motion of the arteries, but in an inverse
direction. After having passed through the dermoid spaces and the
cellular texture which fills them, they go to the great sub-cutaneous
trunks, which run a long course, form, as we have seen, a system wholly
distinct by its position from that of the arteries and which can be
often traced through the integuments. Not seen in the natural state,
the venous ramifications of the spaces of the chorion are considerably
dilated in the subjacent cancerous tumours, and make the skin which
covers these tumours appear to be marked with blue lines, which always
grow larger as the tumour increases. Whenever there is a considerable
distention of the cutaneous organ by an aneurism, pregnancy, dropsy,
&c. this dilatation also takes place, provided the cause of the
distention pursues a chronic course; for nothing similar is seen in
acute affections, whatever swellings may have taken place, as in those
consequent upon fractures, upon compound luxations, &c.

All the black blood formed in the skin goes into the general venous
system; no portion belongs to the abdominal.


_Nerves._

Their distribution is nearly the same as that of the blood vessels.
Many very considerable branches, as different divisions of the
musculo-cutaneous, the internal cutaneous, the lumbar, the saphena,
the anterior tibial, the intercostals, the cervicals, &c. form a kind
of sub-cutaneous nervous system, from which go all the branches that
enter the dermis. These branches, in passing through the dermoid spaces
with the arteries and the veins, appear to anastomose often together,
go through the pores which terminate the spaces on the interior, and no
doubt form the papillæ. Observe even that on the hand where the papillæ
are very evident, there are, in proportion to the surface, many more
sub-cutaneous nerves than any where else.


_Absorbents._

Many absorbents creep under the skin; it is here that they can be
the most easily studied. All the veins are surrounded with them;
various fasciculi are observed in their interstices; so that a layer
of absorbents, arranged in the form of a continuous layer, seems to
separate, in the extremities, the aponeurosis and the skin. There is
no doubt that the origin of the most of these vessels exists in the
chorion, that they carry to the blood the fat and the cellular lymph
of its spaces, and the nutritive matter of its fibres. But is there a
particular order of branches opening upon the surface of the epidermis
to absorb in certain cases foreign substances? This question cannot be
answered by anatomical inspection. But the following considerations
appear to me to throw great light upon it.

1st. The sub-cutaneous absorbents, visible by injections, are too
numerous in proportion for the mere purpose of carrying back the fat
and serum of the neighbouring parts.

2d. There are many medicines which appear to be evidently absorbed;
such are mercury in the venereal disease, various purgative and
emetic substances, febrifuges even, as cinchona, which, when applied
by friction, have produced their effects as well as if taken by the
stomach; cantharides often act upon the kidneys, when the tincture is
used as a liniment, narcotic substances sometimes occasion a weight in
the head and drowsiness when they have been externally applied, &c.
These different effects are well known and many authors have given
examples of them.

3d. There is we know absorption of different kinds of virus, of that
of hydrophobia, of the small-pox, of the venom of the viper, &c. an
absorption, it is true, which rarely takes place when the epidermis
is whole, but which uniformly does, when this being removed, the
matter is found in contact with the external capillary net-work of
which we have spoken. I would remark even that the different kinds of
inoculation of the small-pox, of the vaccine disease, &c. evidently
prove both the existence and importance of this net-work, to which
heretofore sufficient attention has not been paid. There are many
contagious principles which are absorbed through the epidermis; such
are those of the plague which the clothes communicate and those of
different pestilential fevers which penetrate by the skin more than by
respiration. I believe cutaneous absorptions from which diseases arise
may be divided in the following way:

                                       {1st, local, as the itch, herpes,
  1st. Absorptions which take place    {  tinea capitis, &c. &c.
    through the epidermis, and which   {2d, general, as pestilential
    produce an effect                  {  diseases, putrid fevers taken
                                       {  in an unhealthy place, &c. &c.

                                       {1st, local, as the vaccine
  2d. Absorptions which take place     {  disease, the small-pox, &c. &c.
    only when the epidermis is removed,{2d, general, as hydrophobia, the
    and from which arises              {  venom of the viper, a wound
    an effect                          {  with an instrument impregnated
                                       {  with putrid matter, &c. &c.

We see by this table that the absorbents when charged with injurious
substances, sometimes do not transmit them beyond the part and
sometimes carry them to the blood, which conveys them to the different
organs of the economy. Some authors have thought that in those cases
in which the effects of the absorption become general, there is rather
nervous action and sympathetic phenomena, than the transmission of
an injurious matter into the circulation, and that consequently the
solids take almost an exclusive part in these diseases. But to remove
all doubt upon this point it is sufficient to observe, 1st, that, in
the absorption of many contagious substances, for example, when from
the puncture of the finger with a scalpel impregnated with putrid
substances, a pain is produced, there is even a redness along the whole
course of the absorbents of the arm, and the axillary glands afterwards
swell; 2d, that by transfusing into the veins most of the substances
that are applied in frictions, effects analogous to those which take
place in these frictions are produced. Thus purgatives and emetics,
transfused or absorbed, act upon the intestines and stomach the same
as if introduced in any other way. It seems to me that sufficient use
has not been made of the experiments of the last age upon transfusions.
By comparing their effect with that which takes place upon the
cutaneous organ, I think that it is impossible not to admit a morbific
principle in the blood, at the time of contagious diseases.

3d. After the use of mercury taken in frictions, the emanations of this
metal from the animal fluids, act evidently upon silver when placed in
the mouth, the rectum, &c. I am persuaded even that the blood which
in the natural state exerts but very little action upon this metal,
would alter it then. Accoucheurs know that the waters of the amnios of
those women who have made use of mercurial frictions exhibit the same
phenomenon.

4th. Many substances that are not medicinal can be transmitted to the
blood by cutaneous absorption. Water appears to enter it in this way,
in the rapid production of certain dropsies, in those cases related of
travellers, who wanting fresh water on the ocean, have in part quenched
their thirst by surrounding themselves with damp clothes, &c. When our
garments are impregnated with the oil of turpentine, the urine soon
acquires an odour that is owing to the principles transmitted to the
blood by absorption. Many judicious philosophers have asserted that the
weight of the body has been increased by a walk in the morning.

I have observed that after remaining in the dissecting room some time,
the intestinal flatus frequently acquires an odour exactly similar to
that which the bodies in putrefaction exhale. In the following way
I convinced myself that it was the skin as much as the lungs that
absorbed these odorous particles. I closed my nostrils, and fitted
a long tunnel to my mouth, which passing out of the window allowed
me to breathe the external air. The flatus from my bowels, after I
had remained an hour in a small dissecting room, at the side of two
very fetid bodies, acquired an odour nearly similar to theirs. I have
observed also that by touching for a long time fetid substances, the
flatus acquires more of this odour, than by remaining only in an air
loaded with cadaverous exhalations. Then the absorbents carry at first
these exhalations to the blood, which afterwards throws them out by the
mucous surface of the intestines. Thus when the urine is absorbed, the
saliva, the mucous juices, &c. have an urinous odour.

I could accumulate many other proofs of cutaneous absorption; but I
have selected only the principal. Many others have been cited; Haller
in particular, to whom I refer, has multiplied examples of it.

I would remark however that cutaneous absorptions have a character
of remarkable irregularity; that under the same apparent influence,
they sometimes take place and sometimes do not. It is thus that most
often we absorb nothing in a bath, that we escape or take contagions,
that the vaccine disease is or is not communicated, that the variolous
inoculation is also often uncertain, &c. This is not astonishing. It
requires a certain degree of sensibility in the skin for the absorption
of this or that substance; above or below this degree, the absorbents
repel this substance. Thus in the intestinal canal, if you raise by a
purgative, the ordinary degree of sensibility of the lacteals, they
cease immediately for a time to take up drinks, chyle, &c. and every
thing passes off by the anus. Now a thousand causes act incessantly
upon the skin; a thousand irritants by turns applied to it make the
degree of its organic sensibility vary every instant, increase,
diminish and remove it from that which is necessary for absorption.
Is it astonishing then that this function should exhibit so many
varieties? Many modern philosophers have produced numerous negative
facts against cutaneous absorption. What do these facts prove? only
the varieties of sensibility which I have noticed; but they do not
destroy the mass of positive facts, generally acknowledged and which
together form a body of proof which nothing can oppose. Thus we have
seen the mucous surfaces variable in their vital forces on account
of the variety of their excitants, vary also in their absorption.
If in the serous membranes, in the cellular texture, in the work of
nutrition for the organs, this function is uniform, it is because being
constantly in contact with the same bodies, the surfaces where it is
going on have an uniform degree of organic sensibility.

Many facts, in relation especially to contagions seem to prove that a
state of weakness is favourable to cutaneous absorption. 1st. Children
and women absorb more easily than strong and vigorous men. 2d. Many
physicians have observed that in the night in which the cutaneous organ
is in a state of remission in this respect, as it is not stimulated
by external objects, contagious diseases are more easily taken. 3d. I
have remarked that most of the pupils who have fallen sick during my
dissections, had carried to their chambers portions of subjects, the
emanations from which had been able to affect them during sleep. 4th.
We know that practitioners recommend, that persons should not expose
themselves to contagious miasmata during hunger, as the forces are then
languid on account of the emptiness of the stomach.


_Exhalants._

The external capillary system which surrounds the chorion and embraces
the papillæ, appears to be the origin of these vessels, as it is the
termination of the arteries of the dermoid spaces. The exhalants take
up their fluid there, which they throw out upon the epidermis. We have
no anatomical knowledge as to their form, their length, their course
and their direction; but their existence is incontestibly proved, 1st,
by injections, which are sometimes poured out upon the whole cutaneous
surface; 2d, by the sanguineous exhalation which takes place in some
diseases in which there is a real bloody sweat; 3d, by the natural
sweat and by transpiration, which can evidently have no other agents,
though some authors have admitted that there were certain pretended
glands for the secretion of these fluids.

An infinite number of calculations has been made to ascertain the
quantity of fluid which the cutaneous exhalants usually pour out.
We are dismayed when we read the result of the labours of many
philosophers upon this point, when we go over the calculations,
enormously multiplied, of Dodard, Sanctorius, Keil, Robinson, Roye, &c.
To what do all these calculations, for which the life of a single man
would perhaps be insufficient, tend? To prove to us that when we start
from a false principle, the whole chain of consequences drawn from it
is false, though these consequences may be rigorously deduced from each
other. In fact, most philosophers have considered the skin as a kind of
fountain with numerous capillary tubes, always throwing out in the same
time the same quantity of fluids, and being able consequently to be
subjected, like inert capillaries which pour out fluids, to proportions
and calculations of quantity. But the results of these calculations
have soon proved how mistaken their authors were. Read these results,
and you will see that none of them agree, that frequently very great
differences characterize them. Is this astonishing? A thousand causes
make the transpiration vary at every instant. Temperament, exercise,
rest, digestion, sleep, watchfulness, the passions, &c. increase or
diminish the action of the cutaneous exhalants. I do not speak of the
difference from climate, seasons, &c. which is still more decided.

An attempt has even been made recently to ascertain, what belongs to
the urine, to the transpiration, to the pulmonary perspiration and
to the excrements, to calculate the relation which exists between the
quantities thrown out in these four ways; useless researches! We might
obtain from them results for one man, which would not be applicable
to others. Thus see if we have ever been able to make a single useful
application to physiology or pathology of all these immense labours
on transpiration. What would you say of a man who, during the days of
the equinox, in which the state of the atmosphere was every minute
changing, should try to establish proportions between the quantities of
rain which fell in every quarter of an hour, or of one who endeavoured
to fix relations between the quantities of fluids which are evaporated
in given times, from the surface of a vessel under which the intensity
of the heat which warmed the water varied every instant. The comparison
is just. We might be able to say in general, at the end of a given
time, nearly how many pounds of substances went from the body; and yet
this varies in every individual. But to attempt to say in a general
manner what, in this common quantity, the urine and transpiration
separately furnish, is to prove that we do not understand the nature of
the vital forces.

We have already observed, that all our knowledge upon the varieties of
transpiration, is reduced to some general data; that, for example, in
cold seasons and climates, it is by the internal emunctories that the
residue of nutrition and digestion principally passes off, whilst in
warm climates and seasons, it is the cutaneous organ that principally
throws it out.

The skin on the one hand, and the kidneys and pulmonary surface on the
other, are then in this respect, in a constantly inverse activity.
Physicians very well know this difference in regard to the urine and
sweat; they know that when one is increased, the other is diminished:
that in winter the urine contains principles of various kinds, and
that in summer the transpiration has a salt taste and other peculiar
characters which it owes to the substances which are foreign to it
in the first season. But they have not so well examined the relation
of the transpiration with the sweat; this determined me to make the
following experiments:

I wished to know what is the state of the respiratory fluid in
summer, in which there is much transpiration, and in which all the
heterogeneous principles consequently go out by the skin. To obtain
this fluid which is exhaled in insensible vapour, I placed a clean,
empty bottle in a pail filled with ice and the muriate of soda, and
I respired a long time in it, taking care not to allow any saliva to
fall in. The parietes, chilled by the external ice, condensed into
small icicles the vapour of my breath, on the internal surface of the
vessel. When I had made a certain quantity of these, I withdrew the
bottle; then by putting it into tepid water, the icicles immediately
melted, and I had in a liquid state my respiration, which was before
in vapour. Now I have been struck with two things in this experiment,
1st, with the small quantity of fluid that I was able to obtain, though
I had respired for an hour, and afterwards made two men respire each
an hour; 2d, with this, that most of the reagents have no action upon
this fluid. Nitric, sulphuric and muriatic acids, lapis infernalis,
and alkohol produce no effect when mixed with it. In evaporating a
small quantity in the concavity of a watch chrystal, no residuum is
left; placed in a spoon over the flame of a candle, it experiences no
alteration from the heat. In a word, I have been almost tempted to
believe that it was nothing but water. I confess however that this
experiment ought to be carefully repeated.

The little fluid obtained made me believe that the form of the vessel
was not well adapted to the purpose, because it did not present
sufficient surface and the vapour of the lungs was too little divided.
I took then the spiral cylinder of a small alembic which I surrounded
with ice in a pail; I made a man breathe through it, and I obtained
in fact more fluid, but infinitely less however than I expected,
considering the great cloud that is formed in winter by respiration.
In an hour, two ounces of fluid only were condensed, which I weighed
comparatively with water, and found a little heavier, a proof that some
principles are mixed with its aqueous portion, and with which I am
unacquainted.

I am convinced that in winter I should have condensed much more vapour;
the inspection of an animal that breathes proves it even, as I have
just said. I am persuaded also, that like the urine, the respiratory
fluid is then charged with principles which, during summer, pass off
by the skin, though I have not however any experimental data upon
this essential point, which I propose to clear up the approaching
winter. I think even that many colds depend upon this. In fact, many
of these principles thrown out by the mucous surface of the bronchia,
not soluble in the air, like their aqueous vehicle, stagnate upon this
surface, irritate and excite a cough which throws them off. On this
account, we cough much in winter, as we have often occasion to bathe
in summer, when the saline substances, which are accumulated upon the
skin by the exhalation that takes place there, cannot be evaporated by
the air. Hence why also in many affections of the lungs, in which the
mucous glands and the bronchial exhalants do not increase the quantity
of fluid they usually pour out, but only separate with it, on account
of their change of organic sensibility, substances which the air cannot
dissolve, hence, I say, why in these affections there is a constant
cough; for, as I have said, when a substance remains for any time upon
the mucous system, it irritates, and it makes an effort to get rid of
it. I believe that this elucidates the cause of many coughs, which
have been considered as nervous, on account of the small quantity of
expectoration, and which are only a means that nature employs to supply
the want of the evaporation of the air.

I think that physiologists have not paid sufficient attention, either
as it respects the bronchia or the skin, to the part which can be
evaporated, and to that which cannot. Some animals seem to throw out
more of these principles that cannot be evaporated, than man; hence
why it is necessary to curry horses every day, and even to bathe them
often, in order to cleanse their skins which the air would leave dirty.
Fourcroy and Vauquelin have remarked that there is never phosphate of
lime in the urine of these animals; this substance appears to pass out
with the sweat, and to be chrystalized on the surface of the skin, from
which it is removed by friction and water. I can hardly conceive how
the hairs can be the emunctories of it; it appears to me to be more
natural to think from analogy, that it is by the sweat that it escapes.
I presume that the rain, in the natural state is as necessary to these
animals as to plants. The first do not avoid it; many even expose
themselves to it; it serves as a bath for them, removes the saline
particles the air does not dissolve, and washes the skin.

The cutaneous exhalants do not appear to be everywhere equally
abundant. The face and chest contain many of them; we sweat easily in
these places. On the back and the extremities they are less numerous.
It is rare that we sweat on the palms of the hands and the soles of the
feet. Besides this varies remarkably in different individuals. I know
two sisters, belonging to a family in which phthisis has been frequent,
whose chests are however well formed, and who have never had any sign
of an affection of the lungs, and yet when they are warm they always
sweat from the chest. We know that in some the sweat appears most
usually in the face, and in others on the cranium.

Have the nerves any influence upon the cutaneous exhalation? In many
cases of paralysis, the patients sweat from the sound side. I have
attended, for two months past, a man at the Hôtel Dieu, who after
an apoplexy, had hemiplegia so that the left side of the body was
immoveable, and who only sweats from this side, so that an evident line
of demarcation is visible the whole length of the median line. On one
side the skin is dry, and on the other it is very moist. I know cases
are related in which opposite phenomena have taken place; but they do
not destroy the observation that is uniformly made, that the sweat
takes place equally upon the sound and the diseased side. Besides, who
does not know that when the nervous action is annihilated in a limb,
a blister acts upon it as usual? Do convulsions, in which the nervous
action is so much raised, increase cutaneous exhalation? Have the
states of extreme sensibility, in which all the cutaneous nerves are
so susceptible of receiving all impressions, the least known influence
upon sweating? Let us acknowledge then that in cutaneous exhalation, as
in secretion, we know nothing of the nature of the nervous influence,
if it does exist.


_Sebaceous Glands._

Besides the insensible transpiration and the sweat, which are thrown
out by the skin, this organ is constantly lubricated by an oily fluid,
which occasions, when coming out of a bath, the water with which it
does not unite, to collect in small drops upon the body, which greases
the linen when it remains too long in contact with the skin, catches
the dust that is floating in the air, makes, it remain upon the skin,
and retains many foreign substances coming with the sweat from without
or within.

This fluid is in general much more abundant in negroes, whose skin
is on this account disagreeable, than in European nations in whom
it abounds especially in places provided with hair, particularly
on the cranium. If left without dressing, the hair becomes greasy,
unctuous and shiny; it seems even that this abundance of oily fluid is
destined to support their suppleness. Thus art imitates nature in the
preparation of it, and greasy substances almost always enter into the
dressings of the toilet. It appears that there is less of this fluid in
other parts where there are hairs. It oozes in very small quantity from
the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands, no doubt on account
of the thickness of the epidermis. When we wash these last, the water
collects in small drops on the back of them, and not in the palms,
which are easily and uniformly wet; there is never any of it deposited
on the surface of the nails. This cutaneous oil, retained in certain
places, as in the axilla, the perineum, the folds of the scrotum, &c.
becomes mixed there with certain principles of the transpiration, and
often exhales a fetor that is almost insupportable.

This oily fluid, of the nature of which we know but little, is not
like the transpiration or the fat exposed to evident increase and
diminution; it is always found in nearly the same proportion. It
appears to preserve the suppleness of the skin, by preventing it from
cracking. The ancients sought no doubt to imitate its action over the
whole skin, as we imitate by pomatum its functions in regard to the
hair, by the oily unctions which they made upon the body. This we know
was much practised among the Romans.

Whence comes this cutaneous oil? It can be furnished from three
sources, 1st, from transudation; 2d, secretion; 3d, exhalation.

Some have thought that the sub-cutaneous fat oozed through the pores to
form it; but the scrotum which is destitute of this fat is one of the
most oily parts. The skin of the cranium, which is so to the highest
degree, is hardly at all fatty. That of the cheeks which covers much
fat, is scarcely lubricated with it, &c. In emaciation the skin is
often as unctuous as in corpulency, though it is not always the case.
Finally, in all the other functions, physical transudation is proved to
be nothing; would it exist then here alone?

Those who admit the secretion of the cutaneous oil, (and they are the
greatest number,) place the source of it in the small glands that are
called sebaceous, and which they say are every where spread under the
skin. We see some small tubercles upon the convexity of the ear, upon
the nose, &c.; but in most of the other parts it is impossible to
distinguish any thing; we see only the small eminences of which I have
spoken and which make the skin rough; now they have nothing in common
with these glands, the existence of which I do not deny, but which I
confess I have many times in vain sought for.

This has made me think that there is perhaps an order of exhalants
destined to separate the cutaneous oil, and which is distinct from
that of the exhalants which throw out the transpiratory matter. There
is in the cellular texture exhalants for fat and others for serum.
Certainly no gland presides there over the secretion of the fat. It is
the same with the marrow which the exhalants of the medullary membrane
furnish. There is I think as much probability in the supposition of the
exhalation, as of that of the secretion of the cutaneous oil.

Besides, we must not confound this oil, either with that ceruminous
matter which certain glands pour out on the edges of the eyelids and
behind the ears, and which is forced out by pressure in the form of
little worms, or with that whitish substance that is collected between
the glans and the prepuce, and which is so evidently furnished by small
glands.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.


I. _Properties of Texture._

These properties are much developed in the skin. The alternations
of emaciation and corpulency through which our organs, the limbs
especially, pass sometimes from a determinate size to one double or
even treble, and afterwards return to their primitive state, prove
these properties; and so do all the different tumours, deposits of
pus, external aneurisms, sudden engorgements which accompany great
contusions, aqueous collections in the abdomen, pregnancy, scirrhi,
numerous affections which increase the size of the testicle, hydrocele,
&c. We see in all these cases the skin at first extended and dilated,
then contracting when the cause of the distension has ceased, and
occupying the place in which it was originally circumscribed.

The remarkable separation which the two edges of a wound experience,
that is made by a cutting instrument, is owing to the contractility
of texture. This separation which takes place upon the dead body,
proves what we have already often remarked, viz. that the properties of
texture, absolutely inherent in the organic texture, are foreign to the
vital forces from which they only borrow an increase of energy; thus
the cutaneous retraction is much stronger during life in a longitudinal
or transverse wound. But it is particularly in amputation that we
observe this increase of contractility from the vital action. No part,
not even the muscles retract so much as the skin; hence the precept so
much recommended in this operation of saving the integuments as much
as possible; hence the essential modifications that have been made in
the ancient methods. The muscular retraction is more sudden; but this,
which is more durable, ultimately prevails; so that in the ancient mode
of amputation, where every part was cut at the same level, they had a
conical stump, the summit of which was formed by the bone, in which was
next seen the muscles, arteries, &c. and in which the skin representing
the base, terminated on the side of the limb.

There are however many cases in which the dermoid extensibility is less
than it at first seems to be. For example, in large sarcoceles, the
skin of the neighbouring parts of the scrotum being drawn, is applied
upon the tumour, and makes up for the extensibility that is wanting in
the skin of this part; that of the penis especially is almost wholly
employed to cover the tumour; so that this organ disappears. It is to
the limits placed to the cutaneous extensibility that must also be
referred the following phenomenon; in a wound with loss of substance,
the fleshy granulations, in contracting by the evacuation of the
white substance that filled them, draw the neighbouring skin in order
to cover the wound; now this drawing produces not only an extension
but a real locomotion. Hence why when the skin, naturally tense and
adherent, cannot yield to this locomotion, the cicatrices are formed
with so much difficulty, as we see upon the cranium, the sternum, &c.;
why on the contrary on the scrotum, the fold of the axilla, &c. they
take place with so little; why in dissecting out tumours, it is so much
recommended to save the sound integuments, &c.

When the skin is stretched, the fibres which compose the spaces that
have been spoken of, separate from each other, and these spaces become
broader. Their breadth becomes especially evident on the internal
surface of the dermis; for as all the pores of the external surface
pierce obliquely its texture, the distension of this texture only
diminishes the length of the small canal they form, but does not
enlarge the orifice of it; thus whilst the internal surface contains
interstices of considerable size, this remains uniform, but allows us
to see these interstices, which render it more transparent where they
exist; hence that appearance like marble on the skin of the abdomen of
women who have had many children.

When the skin is contracted, the internal spaces are drawn together
and even effaced. The external surface which has none of these, cannot
diminish so much in breadth, so that there is a disproportion in the
breadth of the internal and external surface; hence, as I have said,
the convexity of the latter in the horny hardening produced by boiling
water; hence also the inequalities and external roughness which
takes place when cold acts powerfully upon us, and which contracts
the dermoid texture. Besides, this phenomenon only takes place when
the contractility is evident in the ordinary state; for if there has
been previous distention, the cells already enlarged, return only in
contracting to their natural state, and there is no disproportion in
the extent of the internal and external surfaces of the skin.

In most of the extensions, there is a diminution of the thickness of
the dermoid texture. It is only when it is dilated by the infiltration
of water in its spaces, as in leucophlegmasia, that it increases in
thickness by diminishing in density. In chronic inflammation, in
engorgement, and in various alterations of which the dermoid texture is
the seat, it loses in part the faculty of stretching; it breaks with
ease when it is distended. This is what happens in some aneurisms,
in those of the aorta especially that have produced an absorption of
the sternum. A slow inflammation seizes upon the skin that covers the
tumour, and it breaks with a degree of distention infinitely below what
it bears in a sound state, if the death of the patient does not prevent
this fatal rupture, two examples of which I have seen in the ward of
lying in women at the Hôtel Dieu. In this state of inflammation, the
distention is very painful, whilst it is not so in the ordinary state.

The skin loses also its contractile power in most of the chronic
affections of which it is the seat, and which alter its texture.

Are there some days in which the skin is more contracted, and others
in which it is looser and more expanded? I believe so, from observing
the marks left after small-pox, which are much more apparent and deeper
some days than others.


II. _Vital Properties._

These are strongly marked in this system. We might say, that nature
by giving an excess of life to this dermoid covering, has wished to
establish a striking line of demarcation, and to make us perceive the
difference between the inorganic bodies with which its external surface
is in contact, and the organized textures that its internal surface
covers. I shall consider these vital properties as in all the other
systems; some belong to animal life and others to organic.


_Properties of Animal Life._

The animal sensibility exists in the highest degree in the skin. It
presides over the feeling, which is more acute and delicate there than
in most of the other textures. It is also the cause of touch, a double
function which is very different.

The feeling is the faculty of perceiving the impression of the
surrounding bodies. It gives us the sensations of heat and cold,
moisture and dryness, hardness and softness, &c. It has relation then,
1st, to the existence; 2d, to the general modifications of external
bodies. Its exercise precedes that of all the other senses which
cannot be exercised until after its action. It is necessary to the
sight, to hearing, smelling and the taste, as it is to the touch. It
depends only upon a particular modification of the animal sensibility;
it is nothing but this property considered in exercise. Thus when the
particular modifications of this sensibility which preside over the
other senses have been destroyed, when the eye is insensible to light,
the ear to sounds, the tongue to tastes and the pituitary membrane to
odours, these different organs still preserve the faculty of feeling,
both the presence of bodies and their general attributes.

The touch has only relation to the particular modifications of bodies;
it is the source of our notions upon their external forms, their
dimensions, size, direction, &c. It differs essentially from the four
other senses.

1st. In this, that it does not require, like the feeling, any
particular modification of sensibility. The hand is a little more
sensible than the rest of the skin; but there is not a great
difference, and we should touch bodies almost as well, if that of
the abdomen covered the phalanges. On the contrary, each sense has a
peculiar sensibility which places it exclusively in relation with a
determinate body in nature. The pituitary membrane would be struck by
light in vain, if placed at the bottom of the eye like the retina;
the palatine membrane if it lined the nasal fossæ, would not perceive
odours, &c.

2d. The touch is exercised only upon masses, more or less considerable
parcels. The other senses are brought into action by the insensible and
infinitely multiplied particles of bodies, as the luminous, savoury
particles, &c.

3d. Most of the other senses do not require the previous exercise of
the will. Odours, light and sounds strike upon their respective organs,
and often produce, without our attending to them, their respective
sensations. It is the same with feeling; the will most commonly has
no part in it. It is exercised because we live in the midst of many
excitements. We do not most often seek for the causes of general
sensations; they are those that come and act upon us. On the contrary,
the touch requires to be produced by an act of the will. It is exerted
in consequence of the exercise of the other senses; it is because we
have seen, heard or felt an object, that we touch it. We confirm or
correct by this sense the notions, which the others have given us.
Hence why it is, as it were, dependant on them. The more they are
contracted, the less frequently is it exercised. The blind, the deaf,
&c. have less desire to touch than him, who has all his sensitive gates
open to the impression of external bodies.

4th. Most of the other senses require a peculiar structure as well as a
peculiar sensibility in the organs which compose them. On the contrary,
the touch only requires a particular form in its organs. Provided that
these have on the one hand animal sensibility, and on the other can
embrace by many points external objects, they can distinguish their
tangible qualities. The touch will be obscure if we grasp bodies in
one or two directions only; yet it will take place. Thus we touch with
the hollow of the axilla, the bend of the arms, hams, &c. with the
lips and with the tongue. Thus the elephant touches with his trunk,
reptiles by twining themselves around bodies, most animals with their
snouts, &c. But the more the points of contact are multiplied, the more
perfectly is the sense exercised. The hand of man is in this respect
the most advantageously formed; it proves that he is better adapted to
communicate with what surrounds him than all other animals; that the
empire of his animal life is naturally much more extended than that
of theirs; that his sensations are more accurate, because they have a
means of perfection that theirs have not; and that his intellectual
faculties are destined to have an infinitely greater sphere, since they
have an organ infinitely better than theirs to perfect them.

The sensibility of the skin resides essentially, as we have seen, in
the papillary body; it is there that all the great phenomena relative
to sensation take place. It is this portion of the skin that truly
belongs to animal life, as the reticular body is, on account of the
vascular plexus that forms it, the portion essentially dependant on
organic life. The chorion being as it were passive, remains foreign to
every kind of important function, and serves only for a covering.

The extremely acute sensibility of the papillary body requires a
covering to defend it from strong impressions. This covering is the
epidermis. When it is removed, every touch is painful; the impression
of the air even is very much so; it is this removal of the epidermis
that produces the smarting that is felt when a blister is taken off.
Observe in fact that smarting is a very frequent kind of pain, which
the animal sensibility of the skin occasions when more raised than
usual. This term[1] is borrowed from burns, which, when they are only
to a certain extent, acting nearly like blisters, lay the papillæ bare;
now as it is always the skin which is exposed to the action of fire,
we transfer to all burnt organs the ideas which we attach to the word
smarting. But the pain is far from having the same character in the
other systems; this peculiar one belongs only to the dermoid, in which
it takes place from a burn, erysipelas, after a blister, &c. and during
all inflammations that have their seat in the reticular body. No other
system when inflamed gives us this sensation. The pain is throbbing
in the cellular; it exhibits a wholly different modification in the
muscular, when it is the seat of acute rheumatism, &c.

 [1] In order to understand this sentence it should be observed that
 the word which I have translated smarting is _cuisson_, which means
 the action of fire upon animal bodies, and is also used for the
 painful sensation which this action produces.—TR.

There is another kind of pain which is also peculiar to the cutaneous
system; it is itching, which is the first degree of smarting. We
remove it by a gentle friction, which exciting in the papillæ a
different sensation, effaces that of which they are then the seat;
but when this new sensation has passed off, the former one, which is
occasioned by a permanent cause, is reproduced and requires a new
friction; there happens then in a small way, what we observe in a
large one, when a stronger pain makes us forget one that is weaker. No
other system in the economy exhibits this kind of pain, so frequent in
itch, herpes and many other cutaneous eruptions. In their tubercular
inflammations, the serous membranes become the seat of white eruptions,
analogous to many of those of the skin; the mucous surfaces are also
often affected with many small pimples; now this sensation is never
manifested in either of them.

There is also a sensation which appears to be the minimum of that pain
of which smarting is the maximum; it is tickling, a mixed sensation,
an hermaphrodite, as an author has called it, which is agreeable when
carried to a certain degree and painful beyond it. Carry the fingers
lightly over a mucous or serous surface, a muscle or a nerve laid bare;
an analogous sensation will never arise from the contact.

The animal sensibility of the skin is, like that of the mucous
surfaces, subjected to the essential influence of habit, which can
transform successively into indifference or even into pleasure, what
was at first painful. Every thing that surrounds us furnishes constant
proof of this assertion. The air in the succession of the seasons,
caloric in the numerous varieties of the atmosphere, in the sudden
change from one temperature to another, water in a bath, in the moist
vapours with which the medium is loaded in which we live, our garments
of which some, as those of wool, are at first very painful, every
thing which acts upon the skin by mere contact, produces sensations
in it which habit continually modifies. Observe the mode of dress of
different nations; in some, all the superior extremities are bare;
in others, the fore-arm only appears; the inferior extremities,
either in whole or part, are naked in others; in some, a more or less
considerable portion of the trunk is left exposed to the air, and among
the savages, nothing is covered. The portions which in each people
remain naked, bear the contact of the air, without giving any painful
sensation. Let them expose, on the contrary, parts usually covered,
especially if it is cold, and at first pain will be the consequence of
it; then the parts gradually becoming accustomed to this contact, will
get to be insensible to it. There has been much said latterly of the
danger of the Grecian costumes, of the nudity of females, &c. I do not
speak of the morality of them; but every thing that is reprehensible
physiologically is, that the progress of the fashion has been more
rapid than that of the sensibility. If they had exposed at first the
neck, then a little of the chest, then the bosom, &c. habit would by
degrees have given a new modification to this property, and no accident
would have resulted from it. But in going suddenly from a costume in
which every part is covered, to that in which the superior half of the
chest, either before or behind, remains naked, is it astonishing that
colds, catarrhs, &c. should be the result of it?

Habit extends its empire, in relation to the skin, even to our manners
themselves. Decency is in this respect a thing of comparison. An Indian
woman, with nothing but a narrow cloth around the pelvis, would be with
us an object at which the public modesty would be shocked. The habit
of mankind serves her as a veil in her own country. A female savage
transported entirely naked to the same country, would be indecent
there; she is not so in her own. Observe our fashions in their rapid
succession; a woman, who by not changing her costume, would have had
two years since, that of a courtezan, would now find herself dressed
with great modesty. Indecency in costume is that merely which shocks
our habit. The female Indian, with the rag that covers only a quarter
of her body, is more decent than the woman in whom a small opening
separated the neck-handkerchief in our old fashions. The sight of the
face shocks those people among whom females are veiled. Let us consider
then habit as the type of the decency of costumes. Nature has wished in
physiology, that the phenomena over which it presides, should be slowly
connected; it is the same in morals. The woman who suddenly changes her
dress from one that is close to one that is not, exposes herself to
painful sensations, to catarrhal diseases, &c. and shocks the eyes of
those who had been accustomed to see her in a different exterior. When
the change is gradually and insensibly brought about, neither health
nor morals are affected.

Habit does not modify the cutaneous sensibility which arises from an
alteration of texture, from an inflammation, &c. Powerfully raised in
this last state, it is much above its natural level. Then the least
contact becomes extremely painful; thus the skin is no longer then in
a state to exercise the sense of feeling. The touch itself does not
distinguish general sensations. All bodies make a common and uniform
impression, it is that of pain.

The animal sensibility of the skin sometimes diminishes and even
disappears; paralysis is a proof of this. These affections, more rare
than the loss of motion, often however take place. In the organs of
the senses, it is the eye which most frequently loses the sensation;
the ear comes next, then the skin, then the nostrils and finally
the tongue, which is the sensitive organ that is always most rarely
paralyzed, no doubt because it is that which is the most connected
with the support of organic life, without which we could not exist.
The others belong especially to animal life, which we can lose in part
without ceasing to exist.

The whole skin is never at the same time paralyzed; there is rarely
even hemiplegia in this respect; the feeling is not extinguished but in
an insulated part. I would remark that the existence of these paralyses
is also a proof of the want of nervous influence upon cutaneous
exhalation and the capillary circulation, since both go on very well in
this case as well as in paralysis of motion, as I have observed above.
Cut the nerves of a limb of an animal, in order to render this limb
insensible; if after this you apply an irritant, the skin will inflame
as usual.

When the animal sensibility is in exercise, is there a kind of erection
of the papillæ that they may feel more acutely? The same observation
may here be made as was in regard to the mucous surfaces. This erection
is an ingenious idea of some physicians, and not a fact which rests
upon observation. I even think that this contradicts it; for examined
with a glass the papillæ appear to be constantly in the same state. Why
should not the skin feel like a nerve laid bare, like the eye, the ear,
&c. in which these sorts of erections have never been imagined?

Animal contractility is wholly foreign to the cutaneous organ, which
moves voluntarily only by the influence of its fleshy pannicle.


_Properties of Organic Life._

Organic sensibility and insensible contractility exist in the highest
degree in the cutaneous organ. The external capillary system, which
forms the reticular body, is, as I have said, especially the seat of
these properties. They are in constant activity in order to preside,
1st, over the capillary circulation; 2d, over exhalation; 3d, over
absorption; 4th, over the nutrition of the whole dermoid texture;
5th, over the secretion of the cutaneous oil, if the sebaceous glands
exist. It is not astonishing that these properties should be so
much developed in the skin, in which they have so many functions to
support. Add to these considerations the constant action of external
bodies, an action which keeps this organ in continual excitement, which
incessantly stimulates its sensibility, which is to this sensibility
what that of the bodies contained in the mucous surfaces is to the
sensibility of these surfaces; the irritation is even more sensible,
because the stimuli are oftener changed. A thousand agents of nature,
of different density and composition continually succeed each other on
the exterior of the body, and at the same time that they act upon the
animal sensibility of the skin, to produce various sensations, they
excite the organic sensibility in order to support the functions over
which this sensibility presides.

Is it astonishing then that the greater number of cutaneous diseases
supposes an alteration in this property and in the insensible organic
contractility which is not separated from it? I divide these diseases
into four classes, according to the structure we have distinguished in
the skin.

1st. There are diseases of the papillæ; these are the paralyses and
various kinds of increase of feeling, which reside only in the nerves.
Women are especially subject to these last, which are so great in some
nervous affections, that mere contact of the skin if considerably
powerful produces convulsions. To this also should be referred the
extreme susceptibility of some individuals in whom tickling produces a
general revolution. It is necessary to distinguish these exaltations
of animal sensibility, from those of which we have spoken above, and
which depend upon inflammation. The organic sensibility is especially
affected in these last; we might say that by its increase it is
transformed into animal sensibility; whereas in the other case this
last property alone is altered.

2d. There are diseases which have evidently their seat in the cellular
texture which occupies the dermoid spaces; such are the inflammations
of the cutaneous portion which covers a phlegmon, a bile, &c.

3d. There are diseases of the external capillary net-work, from which
the exhalants arise. To this must be referred erysipelas, many species
of herpes, measles, scarlatina and many acute cutaneous eruptions that
are daily met with in practice.

4th. Finally, there are diseases in which the chorion is affected.
Elephantiasis, and in general many chronic cutaneous diseases appear
to me to be of this number, and I will even observe that the chorion
never appears to be primarily affected in acute diseases. The
obscurity of its vital forces, its dense and compact texture, and its
comparative want of vessels prevent it from accommodating itself except
to chronic affections. In phlegmonous erysi pelas, in biles, &c. it
is only influenced, but it is not essentially diseased. Thus we have
seen that all the affections of the osseous, cartilaginous, fibrous,
fibro-cartilaginous systems, &c. are really slow and chronic, on
account of the texture and the vital obscurity of these systems.

Now if we reflect on this division of cutaneous diseases, we shall see
that except those of the first class, which are not numerous and which
consist in greater or less alterations of animal sensibility, we shall
see, I say, that all the others suppose a more or less considerable
affection of the organic sensibility and of the corresponding
insensible contractility. All are derived from an increase, a
diminution or an alteration of these properties.

It is also to the different changes of these properties, that must be
referred the more or less copious sweats and the various exudations
of which the skin is the seat. In fact, the exhalant vessels remain
always the same in relation to their structure. Why then do they admit
a greater or less quantity of fluids? Why at certain times do they
allow of the passage of substances, which they repel at others? It is
because the modifications of their organic forces are changed. These
forces are often weakened in an evident manner in diseases; they become
languid and are prostrated. Then blisters are applied in vain; the
organic sensibility no longer answers to the excitement that is made
upon it. This is a striking phenomenon in ataxic fevers, and proves
the independence of the phenomena of cutaneous exhalation, capillary
circulation, &c. in regard to the cerebral nerves. In fact, whilst
during the paroxysm the brain is in extreme excitement, the voluntary
muscles are put by this excitement into a violent state of convulsion,
and the energy of the whole of the animal life seems to be doubled
before it ceases to exist, the organic is already in part exhausted;
the functions of the portion of the skin which belongs to this life
have already ceased.

The stimuli of cutaneous organic sensibility vary remarkably in their
degree of intensity. 1st. The strongest are fire, cantharides, the
alkalies, the acids sufficiently diluted by water not to act but upon
the vital forces and not to alter the dermoid texture by the horny
hardening, the juices of many acrid and corrosive plants, certain
fluids even produced in the economy, as those of cancers, &c. All these
stimuli redden the skin when they are applied to it. 2d. Most of the
same stimuli, diminished in intensity, stimulate it but slightly. 3d.
Finally, aqueous fluids, cataplasms and emollient fomentations seem
to produce this excitement the least; they even rather weaken the
cutaneous organic sensibility; they seem to act upon it like sedatives
and moderate the kind of excitement it produces in inflammations.
The same is true of most of the fatty substances; thus oils, butter,
grease, &c. are in general not calculated to keep up the suppuration
of blisters. It is requisite, in order to keep the skin at the degree
of organic sensibility, necessary for the purulent exudation that then
takes place, to mix cantharides with fatty substances.

The skin does not appear to enjoy sensible organic contractility.
Stimuli usually produce no other action upon it, than the contraction
imperceptible to the eye, which composes insensible contractility, and
which takes place especially in the small capillary vessels. There is
however one circumstance in which this contraction is, to a certain
extent, apparent; it is when cold acts briskly upon the skin, which it
wrinkles into goose flesh, as it is called. I have pointed out above
the mechanism of this contraction, of which the chorion is the seat,
and which holds a medium, like many motions which I have already had
occasion to notice, between the two species of organic contractility.


_Sympathies._

We shall still follow the division of the sympathies into active and
passive, a division which is more remarkable here than in most of the
other systems, because the sympathies are much more numerous.


_Passive Sympathies._

The animal sensibility is very often brought into action in the skin,
by the affections of the other systems. We know that the application
of cold to the sole of the foot frequently produces affections of the
head; that in many cases, the different species of itching, and even of
smarting appear without an injury of the part where the pain is felt.
It is useless to cite examples that are known to all physicians. I will
confine myself to the sympathies of heat and cold alone, which have not
yet been spoken of.

I call by this name the sensation that is experienced upon the skin,
when there is not a superabundance or absence of caloric there. There
is evidently a material cause for the heat in inflammation and for the
cold in the ligature of a great artery. On the contrary, in the cases
of which I spoke, it is but an aberration of the internal sensitive
principle, which resembles that which takes place when we refer the
pain to the extremity of an amputated limb. This is what occurs in many
cases of shivering, in which the internal sensitive principle refers to
the skin a sensation of which the cause does not exist. By approaching
the fire then we do not become warm, because we really were not cold;
but we only destroy by a real sensation, the opposite sensation which
is illusory that we experience, or rather we turn the perception from
this sensation. We know that at the instant of the ejaculation of
semen, a sudden and sympathetic chill often extends over the body.
We know the cold of fear, which almost always arises, like the sweat
produced by this passion, from the sympathetic action exerted upon the
cutaneous organ by an epigastric organ affected by the passion.

Observe what takes place in the beginning of most acute local diseases,
as in those of the serous and mucous surfaces, of the lungs, of
the gastric viscera, &c. &c. The organ which is to be the seat of
the disease is at first affected; immediately many sympathetic and
irregular symptoms arise in all those which are sound; this is the
affection that precedes. When the disease is once developed, and
it follows its periods, a new order is established, as it were, in
the economy. The relations of the organs seem to change. In the
preternatural irregularity of the functions, a kind of regular
assemblage of symptoms is manifested, it is this assemblage which
characterizes the disease and distinguishes it from every other in
which a different order of morbific relations is established between
the functions; now the passage from the natural to the preternatural
relation of functions is marked by a thousand vague symptoms,
which should be attributed to sympathies, and among which appears
particularly the kind of shiver in of which I have spoken.

In the beginning of digestion a kind of sympathetic cold is also
referred to the skin, which is most often as warm as usual; it is
an action exerted by the stomach upon the cutaneous sensibility, an
action from which arises a particular sensation, different no doubt
from that which the same viscus, when disordered, produces in the head,
occasioning head-ache, but which is owing however to the same principle.

The heat is very often sympathetic in the cutaneous organ, less
however, as I have observed, than in the mucous system. We know the
flushes of heat that so often extend over the skin in an irregular
manner, in different fevers, and which are not attended with a greater
disengagement of caloric.

Our modern philosophers will not perhaps be able to understand, how
it is that whilst in the greatest number of cases, the application of
a degree of caloric superior or inferior to that of our temperature,
is necessary to produce heat or cold, this sensation can arise in a
part though it may not have experienced an increase or diminution
of this principle. But in the greatest number of cases has not pain
a material cause? And yet all sympathies produce it without this
cause. The vulgar, who stop at the diversity of the modifications
of feeling, believe that an insulated principle presides over each.
Let us disregard all these modifications, in order to see but a
single principle in the irregularities as in the regular course of
sensibility. That this property, sympathetically altered, gives us
the sensation of heat or cold as in the skin, of pulling as in the
nerves, of lassitude as in the muscles in the beginning of a disease,
&c.; these are but varieties of a single cause, one, of which we are
ignorant, but which evidently exists. In general, the sympathies of
animal sensibility put into action in each system the sensation which
is usual there. The sympathy which, acting upon the skin, creates there
a sensation of heat or of cold, would have produced that of lassitude
if it had acted upon a muscle.

In order to form an exact idea of heat and cold considered as
sensations, let us recollect that they may arise from different causes.
1st. From the increase or diminution of the caloric of the atmosphere.
2d. From the disengagement or the want of disengagement of this fluid
in a part of the economy, as in a phlegmon or after the ligature of
an artery of a limb. 3d. Sometimes without previous inflammation more
caloric is disengaged in the whole body; there is a general increase of
temperature; we then feel an internal and external heat; or caloric is
disengaged locally in a part of the skin, and the patient feels a heat
there as he does who applies his hand upon this place. 4th. Finally,
there are sympathies of heat and cold. Some other parts, besides the
mucous surfaces and the skin, feel these sympathies; we know the
sensation of coldness that is felt to arise from the abdomen to the
thorax, &c.

The organic properties of the skin are also frequently put into action
by sympathies. The sweat on the skin is suppressed in a moment, if a
cold body is taken into the stomach. The entrance of teas into this
viscus, and an increased cutaneous exhalation, are two phenomena that
take place almost at the same instant; so that we cannot refer the
second to the absorption of the drink, then to its passage into the
black blood through the lungs, and afterwards into the red blood. The
production of sweat is then here analogous to its suppression in the
preceding case; it resembles that of fear, and that of phthisis in
which the lungs being affected act upon the skin. Shall I speak of
the innumerable varieties of this organ in diseases, of its dryness,
its moisture, its copious sweats, &c. phenomena for the most part
sympathetic, and which arise from the relations which connect this
sound organ with the diseased parts? I have pointed out those which
exist between it and the mucous surfaces. The membrane of the stomach
is the one with which it especially sympathizes. The digestive
phenomena are a proof of this. It would be necessary to treat of all
diseases in order to speak of the sympathetic influences exerted upon
the skin. These influences are often chronic. How in many organic
diseases, do different tumours form upon the skin? Precisely as
petechiæ, miliary eruptions, &c. are produced in acute fevers; the
difference is only in the duration of the sympathetic phenomena.

Animal and sensible organic contractility cannot be evidently put into
action in the passive sympathies of the skin, since it is not endowed
with these properties.


_Active Sympathies._

The four classes of cutaneous affections of which we have spoken,
occasion many sympathetic phenomena, the following are some of them.

1st. Whenever the papillæ are strongly excited, as in the tickling
of very sensitive people, various organs feel it sympathetically;
sometimes it is the heart; hence the syncopes that then take place;
sometimes it is the stomach; thus I knew two persons who could be made
to vomit by tickling them; sometimes it is the brain, as when in very
irritable people, tickling is carried so far as to produce convulsions,
which is not very rare in nervous women. Who is ignorant of the
influence which the organs of generation receive from the skin, when
stimulated in different parts?

Physicians are often astonished at the extraordinary effects which
some mountebanks produce in the economy, who know how to profit by
their knowledge of the cutaneous sympathies produced by tickling.
But why should we be more astonished at these phenomena, than at
the vomitings produced by an affection of the womb, at the diseases
of the liver arising from an injury of the brain, or at hemicrania
the seat of which is in the gastric viscera? The only difference
is that we can in the first instance, produce to a certain extent
those sympathetic phenomena, which we only observe in the other. Why
do we not oftener make use in medicine of the influence which the
skin when tickled exerts upon the other organs? In hemiplegia, in
adynamic, ataxic fevers, &c. who knows if the excitement of the sole
of the foot, which is so sensible, as every one knows, if that of the
hypochondrium, which is not less so in some people, &c. would not be
better, if repeated ten or twenty times a day, than the application of
a blister, the irritation of which soon passes off? Besides you would
never obtain by a blister, rubefacients, &c. means which act as much
and more upon the organic than the animal sensibility, an effect as
striking, an affection as general in the sensitive system, as by the
tickling of certain parts, a means, which acting only upon this last
species of sensibility, produces phenomena exclusively nervous; whilst
the exhalant system and the capillary with red blood are especially
affected by the others. Certainly there are cases in which one of these
means is preferable to the other. I propose to ascertain these cases.

We have not yet sufficiently analyzed the different kinds of excitement
in diseases; we have not endeavoured to profit enough by what
observation has taught us, upon the sympathies we can produce at will.
Might we not however say, that nature has established certain relations
between very remote organs, that we may be able to make use of these
relations in our means of cure? The charlatan, who employs external
tickling for certain nervous affections, is often more rational,
without knowing it, than the physician with all his pharmaceutical
means.

2d. Whenever the cutaneous exhalants or the external capillary system
from which they arise, are affected in any manner, many other parts
feel it, and this is a second order of the active sympathies of the
skin. Here are referred a great number of phenomena, of which the
following are a part.

A bath which acts upon the skin during digestion, affects
sympathetically the stomach, and disturbs this function. When this
viscus is agitated by spasmodic motions, oftentimes the influence which
it receives from it suddenly calms it, and brings it to its ordinary
state. Not long since in my evening visit at the Hôtel Dieu, I saw a
woman who was vomiting continually from a sudden suppression of her
catamenia. I directed sedatives which were useless. The next evening
she was in the same state; I had her put into a bath; every thing was
calmed the moment she came out of it, and yet the catamenia did not
return. Few organs are more dependant on the skin than the stomach.

The action of cold upon the cutaneous organ produces many sympathetic
effects, especially when this action takes place while we are sweating.
The term repercussion of transpiration is not proper to express what
then takes place; it gives a very inaccurate idea. Let us suppose that
a pleurisy arises from cold suddenly applied, the following is what
happens; the organic sensibility of the skin being immediately altered,
that of the pleura is sympathetically altered. By it the exhalants
become in relation with the blood; they admit it instead of the serum
which they before received, and inflammation supervenes. Thus this
phenomenon is the same as that in which the application of a cold body
upon the skin suddenly arrests uterine, nasal hemorrhage, &c. &c.; the
result only differs. Now in this last case, no one ever supposed that
there was a repercussion of fluid. The suppression of the transpiration
is a thing purely accessory and foreign to the internal inflammation
which takes place. When the skin sweats in summer, the vital forces
are more raised by the caloric which penetrates it; in this state, it
is more capable of acting sympathetically upon the forces of the other
systems. Hence why all strong stimulants that act upon it are more to
be feared then. It is so true that it is not the suppression of the
sweat which is dangerous, but the alteration of the vital forces of
the skin which sweats, that many kinds, as the sweat of phthisis, are
not so injurious when they cease for a time; they are checked even
with much more difficulty, because they are not produced by a cause
acting immediately upon the skin. Now if there was a repercussion of
the transpiration, every species of sweat that was suppressed would be
injurious. We never hear of a peripneumony arising from a suppression
of sweat produced by fear, rheumatism, &c. There would be then also a
repercussion of mucous matter, when a pleurisy arises from swallowing
a glass of cold water. Men judge only by that which is striking. The
suppression of the sweat is an effect like inflammation of the pleura,
but it is not the cause of it. If there was no sweat the instant the
cold was applied to the skin, inflammation would nevertheless come on.
In wounds of the head, with abscesses of the liver, &c. there is no
repercussion of fluids.

The trembling of which the voluntary muscles become the seat, the
debility of the pulse which the weakness of the action of the heart
produces, &c. are phenomena which the influence of the skin affected by
cold alone causes. In fact, only this organ, the commencement of the
mucous surfaces and all of that of the bronchia, are made cold by the
external air; all the others remain at their usual temperature.

We know the innumerable phenomena which arise from the disappearance of
herpes, the itch, &c. imprudently produced; in all these cases it does
not appear that the morbific matter is carried to the other organs,
though I do not pretend that this never happens. It is the vital forces
of these which are raised and which then occasion different accidents;
now as these forces vary in each system, these accidents will be
essentially different; thus the same morbific cause disappearing from
the skin, will produce vomiting if thrown upon the stomach, in which
the sensible organic contractility predominates; pains, if it goes to
the nerves which are especially characterized by animal sensibility;
derangements of sight, hearing and smell, if it affects the respective
viscera of these senses; hemorrhage, catarrhs, phthisis, tubercular
inflammation, &c. if it attacks the mucous surfaces, the lungs, the
serous membranes, &c. in which the organic sensibility is much raised.
Now, if the same morbific matter carried upon these different organs,
produced these accidents, they ought to be uniform. Do not their
varieties, and especially the constant analogy which they have with the
predominant vital forces of the organs in which they appear, prove,
that they depend upon the cause which I have pointed out?

We know that the serous surfaces and the cellular texture on the one
part, and the skin on the other, are often in opposition in diseases.
There is no sweat when dropsies are formed; the dryness of the skin is
often even more remarkable than the small quantity of urine, &c.

3d. When the cellular texture contained in the dermoid spaces is
inflamed, as in phlegmonous inflammation, in biles, in some malignant
pustules, &c. there comes on many sympathies which can be referred to
those of the general cellular system, which have been already noticed.

4th. The affections of the chorion itself, all marked with a chronic
character, on account of the kind of vitality and structure of this
portion of the skin, occasion also sympathies which have the same
chronic character, but of which we know but little.

The organic contractility cannot be put sympathetically in action in
the skin, as it does not exist there.


_Characters of the Vital Properties. First Character. The Cutaneous
Life varies in each organ._

Though we have spoken in general of the vital properties of the skin,
they are far from being uniform or at the same degree in all the
regions.

1st. There is no doubt that the animal sensibility of the soles of
the feet and the palms of the hands is greater than that of the other
parts. Many persons are so sensible in the hypochondriac region, that
the least tickling there produces convulsions. The anterior and lateral
part of the trunk is always more sensible than the region of the back.

2d. The organic properties do not vary less. The extreme susceptibility
of the face to receive the blood, is a proof of it, as I have said. It
is generally known that some parts are more proper than others for the
application of blisters. Observe on this subject that the places where
the animal sensibility predominates, are not the same as those in which
the organic is in the greatest proportion. The soles of the feet and
the palms of the hands hold the first rank in relation to one, and the
face in relation to the other.

In diseases we also see these varieties. Who does not know that some
particular parts of the skin are especially the seat of some particular
cutaneous affections, and that when these affections are general, they
always predominate in certain places. We ought not to be astonished
at these varieties, since we have seen that the dermoid texture is
infinitely variable as it respects its papillæ, its reticular body, its
chorion, &c.


_Second Character. Intermission in one relation; continuity in another._

The life of the cutaneous system is essentially intermittent in
relation to animal sensibility. All the senses exhibit this phenomenon.
Thus when the eye has for a long time gazed upon objects, the ear heard
sounds, the nose received odours, and the mouth tastes, these different
organs become unfit to receive new sensations; they become fatigued,
and require rest to regain their forces. It is the same with regard to
feeling and the touch; wearied by the impression of surrounding bodies,
the skin requires an intermission of action to regain excitability
adapted to new impressions. We know that a short time before sleep,
external bodies produce but an obscure sensation upon it, and that
their contact has no effect in this state, in which animals seem
to lose half of their existence. The more powerfully the cutaneous
sensibility has been excited, the more profound is sleep; hence why
all painful exercises, great frictions, &c. are always followed by a
deep sleep. Yet this sense can sometimes exert itself, while the others
sleep; pinch the leg of a man asleep; he draws it away without waking,
and has afterwards no remembrance of the sensation. Thus somnambulists
often hear sounds, even eat, &c.; for, as I have said elsewhere, sleep
may affect but a very limited part of animal life, as it may the whole.

Under the relation of organic sensibility, the life of the cutaneous
system is essentially continuous. Thus the functions over which this
property presides have a character opposite to the preceding. The
insensible transpiration takes place continually, though there may be
some periods in which it is more active than in others. The oily fluid
is incessantly carried away and renewed; we might even say sometimes
that it is when the animal sensibility is interrupted, that the
organic is in the greatest exercise.

It is especially in diseases that they have made this observation,
which is besides generally applicable to organic life. All this life
is as active and even more so during the night than during the day.
Most of the diseases that attack the functions which belong to it, are
marked by an increase of activity during the night. All fevers which
particularly affect the circulation have their exacerbation towards
night. In diseases of the heart, the patients are more oppressed at
this period, &c. In phthisis which affects respiration, it is in the
night especially that there is hectic fever, sweats, &c. Pneumonia and
pleurisy, exhibit frequent exacerbations towards night. In glandular
diseases, either acute or chronic we make the same observation. It
would be necessary to refer to almost all the affections which alter
especially an organic function, in order to omit nothing upon this
point. On the contrary, observe hemiplegia, epilepsy, convulsions,
various paralysies of the different organs of sense, most mental
alienations, apoplexy and other affections which exert their influence
more particularly upon animal life, they have not, so often at least,
their exacerbations towards evening and during the night, no doubt
because in the natural state, this life is in the habit of becoming
drowsy and not of being raised like the other which seems to imprint
this character upon its alterations. Other causes no doubt have an
influence upon this phenomenon; but I believe this to be a real one.


_Third Character. Influence of the Sexes._

The sex has an influence upon the cutaneous life. In general the animal
portion of this life is more raised in women, in whom every thing that
belongs to the sensations is proportionally more marked than in man,
who predominates by the power of his locomotive muscles. The effects
of tickling are infinitely more powerful in females. All the arts which
require nicety and delicacy of touch are advantageously cultivated
by women. The peculiar texture of the chorion, a texture generally
more delicate, has no doubt an influence upon this phenomenon. As to
the organic portion of the cutaneous life, the difference is not very
great. Man appears to be superior in this respect; he generally sweats
more; his skin is more unctuous, which proves a greater secretion.


_Fourth Character. Influence of Temperament._

The temperament peculiar to each individual is not a less real cause
of differences in the skin. We know that the colour, roughness and
pliability of this organ vary according as individuals are sanguineous,
phlegmatic, &c. that these external attributes are even a character of
the temperaments. Varieties of structure no doubt coincide with these.
Is it then astonishing that the animal sensibility differs so much,
that the touch itself should be delicate in some and dull in others,
that some should be very ticklish, whilst others are not so at all,
&c.? Ought we to be astonished if the organic sensibility, which is
very variable, should determine, according to the individuals, many
varieties in the phenomena over which it presides; if in some, it
allows much blood to go to the face, and if it repels this fluid in
others who are always pale; if some men sweat much, whilst others have
the skin almost always dry; if the cutaneous oil varies in quantity;
if there are some skins much disposed to eruptions, either acute or
chronic, to pimples of different natures, and if others are almost
always free from them, even when the individuals expose themselves to
the contagion of these diseases; if superficial wounds, of the same
extent and made by the same instrument, are sometimes quicker and
sometimes slower in healing; if the cure of cutaneous diseases is also
very variable in its periods, &c. &c.?


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.


I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

In the first periods after conception, the skin is but a kind of
glutinous covering, which seems to be gradually condensed, forms a
transparent envelope, through which we see in part the subjacent
organs, the vessels especially, and which is torn by the least jar.
This state continues for a month and a half or two months. The
consistence constantly increasing, soon gives to the skin an appearance
more nearly like that which it has in infants after birth. Its delicacy
is extreme at this period. It has not one quarter the thickness of
that of the adult. The moment in which it begins to lose its mucous
state appears to be that in which the fibres of the chorion are formed.
Until then the cellular texture and the vessels especially composed
it, and as the first is abundantly filled with juices during the early
periods, it is not astonishing that it should then give way under the
least pressure. But when the fibres are formed, the cellular texture
diminishes on the one hand, and is concentrated in the spaces that are
developed, and on the other the dermoid fibres, more dense than its
layers, increase the resistance.

We do not see upon the external surface of the skin of the fœtus most
of the wrinkles of which we have spoken above. Those of the face in
particular are not seen; the kind of immobility, in which the facial
muscles are, is evidently the reason of it. The forehead, the eyelids,
the edges of the lips, &c. are smooth. Besides, the abundance of fat
which then distends the integuments of the cheeks, prevents every
species of fold there. As the hands and the feet are found in part
bent at their articulations, by the attitude of the fœtus, different
wrinkles are already formed about these articulations, principally on
the hand, where however they appear less in proportion than afterwards.
The curved, papillary lines are not very evident on the foot and the
hand, even when the epidermis is removed.

The internal surface of the skin is remarkable for the slight adhesion
of the subjacent cellular texture, the cells of which filled with
fatty particles are removed with great ease, by scraping this surface
with the edge of a knife. We see then there the spaces already well
formed, and as distinct in proportion as afterwards. By pursuing their
dissection from within outwards, we insensibly lose sight of them
towards the external surface where the skin is condensed.

More blood enters the skin of the fœtus, than at any other period of
life. It is easy to observe this in small animals taken alive from
the womb of their mother; for in the fœtuses that are dead at birth,
or born prematurely, the cause which destroys life, increasing or
diminishing in the last moments the quantity of cutaneous blood,
prevents us from drawing any conclusion as to the ordinary state by an
inspection of them. The nerves are, as in all the other parts, more
evident; but the papillæ, though sensible, as I have said, have not a
proportionable increase.

The animal sensibility is not in exercise in the skin of the fœtus, or
at least it is very obscure there. This is owing to the absence of the
causes of excitement. These are the surrounding heat, the waters of
the amnios and the parietes of the womb, which can furnish materials
for sensations; but as these causes are always uniform, and have no
varieties, the fœtus can have but a very feeble perception, because
acuteness of sensation requires change of stimuli. We know that heat
long continued at the same degree becomes insensible, that a long
continuance in a bath takes away almost entirely the sensation of the
water, because habit is every thing as it respects sensation; nothing
but what is new affects us powerfully.

Is the organic sensibility of the skin in activity in the fœtus?
does it preside over the alternate exhalation and absorption of the
waters of the amnios? This is not the common opinion, it is not even a
probable one; but this question is far from being settled in so precise
a manner as many other points of physiology.

Besides, it cannot be doubted that there is a copious secretion of an
unctuous and viscid fluid, which covers the whole body of the fœtus,
but which is more abundant in some places than others, as behind the
ears, in the groin, the axilla, &c. either because it is secreted there
in greater quantity, or accumulated on account of the arrangement of
the parts. Accoucheurs have it wiped off after birth, and the females
of animals remove it by the repeated application of their tongues to
the surface of the body. This fluid appears to be to the skin of the
fœtus what the oily fluid is to that of the adult; it defends this
organ from the impression of the waters of the amnios. If the sebaceous
glands exist, it would appear that they furnish it, for it is certainly
from a different source from the sweat. When care has not been taken
to remove this covering, it irritates the skin, and may produce
excoriations, and a species of erysipelas. The air cannot remove it
by solution. Nothing similar oozes from the skin of the infant after
birth. Is it because the black blood alone is capable of furnishing the
materials of this substance?


II. _State of the Dermoid System during growth._

At the moment of birth the dermis experiences a sudden revolution.
Hitherto entered only by black blood, it is at the time the fœtus is
born, more or less coloured by it. Some fœtuses come wholly livid,
others are paler; there is a remarkable variety in this respect. But
all, shortly after they have respired, become more or less decidedly
red. It is owing to the arterial blood which is formed and succeeds
the venous blood that circulated in the cutaneous arteries. In this
respect the state of the skin is in general an index of what goes on
in the lungs. If an infant remains a long time of a violet colour, he
either does not breathe or breathes with difficulty. The extremities of
the hands and the feet in general become red the last. They are those
in which the lividity consequently continues the longest, when this
lividity is very evident. The blood which goes to the cutaneous organ,
enters it in general in a very uniform manner; the cheeks do not appear
to receive more of it in proportion. The sudden excitement it brings to
the organ, raises its vital forces and renders it more fit to receive
the impressions, which are new to it, of the surrounding bodies.

Observe in fact that a thousand different agents, the surrounding
temperature, the air, dress, the fluid in which the fœtus is washed,
the tongues of those quadrupeds who lick their young, carry to the skin
an excitement which is so much the more felt by the fœtus, as it is
not accustomed to it, and as there is an essential difference between
these stimuli, and those to which it had been previously subjected.
It is then that the remarkable sympathy which connects the skin with
all the other organs, becomes especially necessary. Every thing within
soon perceives the new excitements that are applied without. It is
these excitements, those of the mucous surfaces at their origin and
those of the whole of the bronchia, which especially bring into action
many organs hitherto inactive. There happens then, what is observed in
syncope, in which respiration, circulation, the cerebral action and
many functions suspended by the affection, are suddenly roused up by
external friction, by the irritation of the pituitary membrane, &c. The
phenomena are different, but the principles from which they are derived
in both cases are the same.

Then the organic sensibility is also raised. Transpiration is
established. The skin begins to be an emunctory of different
substances, which it did not before throw out; it becomes also capable
of absorbing different principles applied to its surface. The skin
of the fœtus is hardly ever the seat of any kind of eruptions; then
pimples of different kinds frequently appear.

All the parts of the cutaneous organ do not however appear to be raised
to the same degree of organic sensibility. For a long time after birth
the skin of the cranium appears to be the centre of a more active life;
it becomes the frequent seat of many eruptions, all of which denote an
excess of the vital forces. The different kinds of scurf with which
it is covered do not appear elsewhere. In this respect, the skin of
the cranium follows, like the bones of this part and the cerebral
membranes, the early development of the brain, which, on this account
is the seat of diseases in infancy more than at any other age.

The skin of the face seems to be sometimes in less activity. In the
first months after birth, it has not that bright colour which it will
afterwards have upon the cheeks, and which does not commence until the
development of the sinuses and dentition bring to this part more vital
activity for the nutritive work. It is also towards this period that
the eruptions of which this part of the cutaneous system is especially
the seat, like those of the small-pox, measles, &c. begin to take place.

For a long time after birth the skin still preserves a remarkable
degree of softness; a very great quantity of gelatine enters it; this
substance is obtained from it with great ease by ebullition, which,
continued for some time, finally melts this organ entirely. The fibrous
part noticed by Seguin, is in very small quantity. I think it is this
predominance of the gelatinous portion of the skin, which renders that
of young animals easy of digestion. We know that in calves’ heads,
roasted lamb, and small sucking pigs, prepared for our tables, it
presents an aliment which the digestive juices alter with the greatest
ease; whilst that of animals of mature age and especially old ones,
cannot be digested by them. The carnivorous species tear their prey,
feed upon its internal organs, the muscles especially, and leave the
skin. Now what is it that makes the skin of young animals differ from
that of old ones? It is because the gelatinous substance predominates
over the fibrous in the first, and the fibrous predominates in the
second.

The skin of children is gradually thickened; but it is not until the
thirtieth year that it acquires the thickness that it is always to have
afterwards. Till then the different ages are marked in this respect
by different degrees. Take a portion of skin at birth, at two, six,
ten, fifteen, twenty years, &c. you will see these differences in a
remarkable manner. The more its thickness increases the more compact
it becomes; it is because the fibrous substance tends constantly to
predominate over the gelatinous.

As we advance in age, the adhesion of the internal surface of the
dermis with the subjacent cellular texture becomes much greater. It is
more difficult to detach one from the other. On the external surface
the wrinkles of the face are gradually formed. Smiles and tears
agitate the face of the infant the most. One is the expression of the
happiness, the other of the uneasiness which all its passions produce
in its mind. Now the wrinkles which weeping occasions on the eyelids
are marked in rather a more permanent manner, either because weeping
is more frequent than smiling, or because continual winking adds to
the motion which weeping produces, or because less fat is found in
this place. As smiling is on the one hand more rare, and on the other
much fat puffs out the cheeks of the infant, the perpendicular wrinkles
formed by the muscles of the face, which in this motion separate
transversely the features from within outwards, are much slower in
forming. Besides, the nursing of the infant, which requires the
contraction of its face from without inwards, opposes their formation.
The wrinkles of the forehead are always very slow in forming, because
the motions which contract the eyebrow, and those which wrinkle the
forehead, are rare in the infant, who has hardly any of those dark
passions which these motions serve to depict.

The growth of the dermoid system has not remarkable revolutions like
that of most of the others; it goes on in an uniform manner. At the
period of the growth of the hairs, it does not change, because this
growth is absolutely foreign to it, these productions only passing
through it. At puberty it increases in energy like all the other
systems. Until then sweats had not been very copious; for, other things
being equal, we may say that children sweat less in general than
adults, and that the residue of their nutrition passes rather by the
urine, which is probably the reason why they are so remarkably disposed
to calculi. Beyond the twentieth year we begin to sweat more, and until
old age, especially in summer, the fluids appear to go out in this way.


III. _State of the Dermoid System after Growth._

After growth, the skin continues for a long time to have great
activity; the excess of life which animates it, renders it capable of
influencing with ease the other organs if it be but a little excited.
Hence the disposition to pneumonia, pleurisy, &c. from the action of
cold on the skin in sweat, a state in which it is more disposed to
exert an injurious influence upon the internal organs, because its
forces are more excited. As to the different affections which result
from this influence, they depend upon the internal organs upon which it
is directed; so that the same sympathetic irradiations going from the
skin, will produce sometimes an affection of the abdomen, sometimes a
disease of the thorax, according to the age in which the abdominal or
pectoral organs, predominating by their vitality, are more disposed to
answer to the influence directed in general upon the whole economy.

The skin becomes more and more firm and resisting as we advance in age,
as the fibrous substance is constantly tending to a predominance over
the gelatinous. Less blood seems to be carried to it. It becomes less
and less disposed to eruptions, so common in youth and infancy, &c. I
will not speak of its other differences; for all that we have said of
it in the preceding articles relates especially to the adult age.

I will only observe that if, during the greatest part of life, the skin
be so fruitful a source of diseases, and the various alterations it
experiences produce so frequent disorders in the internal organs, it
is only owing to the varied causes of excitement to which it is every
instant subjected. If the glands, the serous surfaces, &c. have an
influence less frequently upon the other organs, it is because being
deeply situated, and almost always in contact with the same excitants,
they are not subject to so many revolutions in their vital forces. The
secreted fluids and those exhaled in the serous and synovial systems
are not, for the same reason, so much subject to those considerable
increases, and those sudden suppressions which so frequently happen to
the sweat.

Observe that society has also multiplied to a great extent the
injurious excitements to which the skin is subjected. These excitements
consist especially in the rapid passage from heat to cold, which
makes the latter act very powerfully upon the cutaneous sensibility,
which like that of all the other systems, answers so much the more
to excitements made upon it, as they are different from those, whose
action they had previously experienced. In the natural state, there
is only the succession of the seasons; nature knows how to connect
insensibly heat with cold, and to make the transition but rarely
abrupt. But in society, the different garments, the artificial degrees
of temperature of our apartments, degrees differing at first from that
of the atmosphere, then varying greatly from each other, so that the
same man who in winter enters thirty apartments, is often subjected to
thirty different temperatures; the hard labour in which most men are
engaged, and which makes them sweat copiously, every thing incessantly
presents numerous causes which make the vital forces of the dermoid
system vary rapidly. Thus the bronchial mucous surface is constantly
in contact in cities, with a thousand excitements that are continually
renewed, and with which the air is not charged in a natural state. Thus
the alimentary substances, continually varying in their composition,
temperature, &c. change the excitement of the gastric mucous surface,
and are the source of many affections, from which most animals are
exempt by the uniformity of their food.

If the skin and the mucous surfaces were always kept at the same
degree of excitement by the constant uniformity of the stimuli, they
would certainly be a much less fruitful source of diseases, as is
clearly proved by the fœtus, which is hardly ever sick, because all the
external causes which act upon its mucous and cutaneous sensibility,
as the heat, the waters of the amnios and the parietes of the womb,
do not vary until birth. At this period, animals brought into a new
medium, find many more varieties in the stimuli which act upon them,
even in a natural state and far from society; thus their diseases are
naturally much more frequent after than before birth. In society, in
which man has increased four, six and even ten times the number of
the stimuli which affect the surfaces destined to be in contact with
the external bodies, is it astonishing that the diseases should be so
disproportioned to those of animals?


IV. _State of the Dermoid System in Old Age._

Towards the decline of life, the dermoid system becomes more and more
firm and compact; it is softened with great difficulty by ebullition.
The gelatine, which it yields, is less abundant and more hard and
consistent. I think it would not be fit to make any kind of glue, even
the strongest, unless mixed with that of adult animals. Its yellowish
tinge becomes very deep. When it is cooled, it requires a much stronger
and more durable fire to melt it; the fibrous portion of the dermis
which does not melt or at least resists for a long time, is infinitely
greater in proportion. It is like the bones in which the gelatinous
portion is in an inverse ratio, and the earthy portion in a direct
ratio to the age.

The dermoid texture becomes then like all the others, dense and stiff;
it is not proper for our food, the teeth cannot tear it. Prepared with
tannin, it is more resisting and less pliable, and cannot on that
account serve for the same purposes as that taken from young animals.
Every one knows the difference of the leather of calves and oxen,
especially when the latter are old. This difference is owing first to
the thickness, which being much greater in the second than the first,
does not allow it to be so easily bent in different directions; and
then to the nature of the texture itself. Cut in two horizontally a
piece of the leather of an ox; each half will be as thin as a piece
of calves skin, and yet it will be less pliable. I do not estimate
here the varieties which may depend on the greater or less quantity of
tannin that may be combined with it; I suppose the proportions to be
all equal.

Submitted to desiccation, the human dermoid texture becomes much more
stiff in old age than in the preceding ones. Maceration softens it with
more difficulty. The hair of a child falls out much sooner by it than
that of an old person; thus it requires longer to clean the skins of
old animals than those of young ones; tanners know this very well. I
would remark upon this subject, that the skins of animals, having more
hairs pass through them, exhibit in comparison with that of man, an
innumerable quantity of little pores on their external surface; which
favours in them on this surface the action of tannin, which insinuating
itself into the dermoid spaces and filling them completely with a new
substance formed by the combination of tannin with gelatine, occupies
entirely the texture of the spaces. The previous maceration to which
the skin has been exposed, favours not only the removal of the hairs,
but facilitates also to a great degree the entrance of the tannin,
by separating the fibres of the spaces, by making them larger, and
increasing the size of the external pores.

The more we advance in age, the less is the quantity of blood that
penetrates the skin. The redness of the cheeks disappears in old
people. We no longer see then the rosy complexion of the young man and
even of the adult, and which arose from the vessels winding through the
cellular texture of the spaces of the chorion.

The continual pressure of external objects increases then remarkably
the adhesion of the subjacent cellular texture to the dermis. They are
separated from each other with great difficulty by carrying the edge
of a scalpel over the internal face of the chorion; a circumstance
which is owing also to this, that the cellular texture having become
more dense, is less easily torn; for this tearing is then necessary,
considering the continuity of the sub-dermoid layer with that which
enters the spaces. The exterior of the skin is uneven and rough. All
the wrinkles of which we have spoken become infinitely more evident;
many belong exclusively to this age.

The vital forces of the dermoid system are more weakened in old age
than those of most of the others, because it is more excited during
life by external bodies. Most of these bodies then make no impression
upon it. The habit of feeling has blunted the animal sensibility. The
touch is exercised but rarely; for, as I have observed, this sense
requires to put it in action, the previous exercise of the will. We
touch, because we have previously seen, heard, tasted, &c. in order
to correct or confirm our other sensations; now the old man, to whom
every thing around is known, to whom nothing is new, is induced to
touch nothing. Compare in this respect the two extreme ages of life.
The infant, to whom every thing that strikes his eyes, his ears, his
nostrils, &c. is unknown, who finds in every thing that surrounds him
new objects of sensation, wishes to touch and lay hold of every thing.
Its little hands are in continual agitation. To touch is a pleasure to
him, for every new object of sensation is agreeable. If in his last
years, man was transported into the midst of objects that never before
struck his senses, he would oftener exercise his touch; but none of
those things excite him among which he has always lived. Hence why old
age is not the age of enjoyments. In fact all our pleasures are almost
relative; we have but little that is absolute; now as habit blunts all
the relative pleasures, which cease because they have existed, the more
the sensations are accumulated by time, the less there are of new ones
left to be experienced, and the more are the sources of happiness dried
up. For a contrary reason, the happiest age is infancy, because it has
before it the whole field of sensations to go over. Man at every step
of his career leaves behind him a cause of his enjoyments. When arrived
at the end he finds only indifference, a state very suitable to his
situation, since it diminishes the distance that separates life from
death.

The organic sensibility of the skin is not less blunted in old age,
than its animal sensibility; hence the following phenomena; 1st,
contagious miasmata are absorbed with difficulty at this age; almost
all pass over the cutaneous surface with impunity. 2d. The exhalation
of sweat is uniformly less; it is hardly ever subject to those great
increases, that are seen in the adult. 3d. The oily fluid is also
furnished in much less quantity; hence the constant dryness of the
exterior of the skin, the cracking of the epidermis in some cases,
&c. 4th. All the diseases which suppose an increase of this organic
sensibility are much more rare. Erysipelas and the different kinds
of eruptions are a proof of it. When these affections take place,
they have a character of remarkable slowness. 5th. The skin resists
external cold much less; it loses easily the caloric of the body,
which always tends to escape in order to be in equilibrium with that
of the surrounding medium; thus old people are always fond of heat.
6th. I am well persuaded that the skin would resist also less, at this
age, a degree of temperature greater than that of the body, and as it
permits the internal caloric to be easily lost in a colder medium, it
would allow the external to penetrate in a warmer one. It would be very
curious to repeat, on the two extreme ages of life, the experiments of
the English physicians.




EPIDERMOID SYSTEM.


If we examine attentively, it is easy to perceive the immense
difference there is between the preceding system and this, which
physiologists have considered as one of its dependancies. Organization,
properties, composition, functions, growth, &c. every thing differs in
the two. By explaining these, the line of demarcation that separates
them will be perceived.

I rank in this system, 1st, the external epidermis; 2d, that which is
spread upon the mucous system, or at least upon one of its parts; 3d,
the nails. Though these last differ very much from the epidermis in
their external appearance, yet they resemble it in so many respects,
that it is difficult not to place them in the same system. In fact the
nails serve as an epidermis for the skin which is subjacent to them;
they are continued with that of the fingers in an evident manner, are
detached and regenerated during life with the same phenomena. The
composition appears to be very analogous. The kind of excrescences is
the same. After death, the nails are detached by the same means as the
epidermis, and then make, as it were, a part of it.


ARTICLE FIRST.

OF THE EXTERNAL EPIDERMIS.

The external epidermis is a transparent membrane, more or less thick,
according to the regions in which it is examined, covering everywhere
the skin, and receiving immediately the excitement of external bodies
which would act too powerfully upon this.


I. _Forms, Relations with the Dermis, &c._

We see upon the epidermis the same wrinkles as upon the skin, because
being exactly contiguous, both wrinkle at the same time. Different
pores open on its surface after having passed through it. Some transmit
the hairs; these are the most apparent; others give passage to the
exhalants. We do not see these in the natural state, because their
course is oblique, and they open between two small layers, which,
being in contact with each other when we do not sweat, conceal their
termination. But if, the skin being very dry, we suddenly sweat, as
after drinking tea, then the little drops which escape from the whole
cutaneous surface, not having had time to run together, but remaining
separate, we see, by the places where they are, the orifice of the
exhalants. Besides, if we examine against the light a considerable
portion of epidermis, its transparency allows us to see many small
pores separated from each other by interstices, and which pass through
it in an oblique direction. It is only in the soles of the feet and the
palms of the hands that we cannot make this observation, which is owing
to the thickness in those parts. It is impossible to distinguish in
these pores the absorbent orifices from those of the exhalants, even
when mercury enters the first by friction.

The internal surface of the epidermis adheres very closely to the skin.
The means of union are at first the exhalants, the absorbents and the
hairs, which in passing through the first, adhere to it more or less,
and thus fix it to the second, from which they arise. By separating
the epidermis by maceration, which is the most proper means, we see on
its internal surface many small elongations of greater or less length,
and which, when examined attentively, appear to be nothing but the
broken extremities of exhalants and absorbents. In fact these little
elongations which are easily raised up, and which then appear like
small ends of thread when they are of some size, but which exhibit only
inequalities when they are left very short, have all of them an oblique
course, and terminate in the pores which, we have said, pass through
the epidermis to go to its surface. Their existence is sufficient, at
the first inspection and without the aid of a microscope, to enable us
to distinguish the internal from the external face of this membrane.
The spaces that separate them are more or less large. About these
spaces, the adhesions are less. It is at this place that the small
epidermoid vesicles are formed with which the skin is covered when
plunged into boiling water. The depressed interstices, which separate
these vesicles, are the places where the exhalants are and which have
prevented the epidermis from being raised up. When ebullition is long
continued, they are detached also.

We cannot doubt then that all these vascular elongations serve
powerfully to unite the epidermis to the chorion. How is the adhesion
formed in their interstices? I know not; but it exists, though it is
less evident. The cellular texture, as I have said, appears to take no
part in it.

Every one knows that many causes destroy the adhesions of the
epidermis, and raise it up. These causes are, 1st, every severe
inflammation, whatever may be its species. We know that after
erysipelas, phlegmon, biles, and cutaneous eruptions of different
natures, the epidermis is always detached; there is then no fluid
that raises it up. The exhalants cannot furnish it, as they are full
of blood; it is dry when detached. 2d. Various cutaneous eruptions,
which have not an inflammatory character, as herpes, &c. also detach
the epidermis at the place where they are. It most commonly comes off
then in the form of dry scales; hence no doubt the idea of some authors
who have attributed to it a scaly structure, which neither observation
nor experiment upon the epidermis in the natural state have proved.
This pealing off in scales is owing to the same cause precisely as the
formation of vesicles which take place the instant after the skin has
been plunged into boiling water, viz. to the greater adhesion of the
exhalant vessels which go to the epidermoid pores. Observe in fact
that it is always in the space between these pores that the scales are
produced, which do not exist in nature, but which arise only from the
manner in which the membrane is raised up. For example, when herpetic
eruptions take place on the chin, the pores through which the hairs
pass are not detached; it is only the epidermis in the space between
these pores; now as these are very near together, these scales are
extremely small; they are almost like dust. 3d. Whenever the epidermis
is raised up by cutaneous inequalities, the least friction detaches it
from these inequalities. Hence why, after strong dry frictions, a rough
skin becomes scaly, whilst a smooth one experiences no alteration; it
is this even, which in the external appearance, contributes much to the
ugliness of the one and the beauty of the other. 4th. After idiopathic
fevers, and even many affections of the internal viscera, the skin
which has felt the sympathetic influence of the disease, becomes the
seat of an alteration which without having any external sign, is
sufficient to break the union of it with the epidermis, which is
everywhere raised up. 5th. We know that the action of a blister, which
draws a large quantity of serum to the external surface of the chorion,
breaks off the exhalants which go from it to the epidermis; so that
this serum is effused under it and forms a more or less considerable
sac. The water does not escape through the open pores, because their
oblique course through the epidermis makes their parietes, when
brought in contact with each other by the pressure of the water,
form an obstacle to it. It is for the same reason, that though these
pores may be very evident, as I have said, in a separate portion of
epidermis when examined against the light, this portion will support
mercury, without giving passage to its particles. 6th. Most of the
preceding means, which produce their effect only by an alteration of
the vital forces, have no effect in raising the epidermis in the dead
body. Putrefaction, maceration and ebullition are those by which it is
effected. All act by breaking the elongations which extend from the
dermis to the epidermis, though the mechanism of this rupture is not
exactly known.


II. _Organization, Composition, &c._

Authors have made many conjectures upon the structure of the epidermis,
which it would be useless to relate here. I shall only speak of what
accurate observation demonstrates. Its thickness is in general very
uniform in all the parts. It has not appeared to me to be increased or
diminished, according to the varieties of thickness of the skin on the
back, the abdomen, the extremities, &c. It is only on the soles of the
feet, the palms of the hands and the corresponding face of the fingers,
that this thickness becomes greater. It is even so great in these
places, that there is no proportion between them and the other parts of
the body as it respects this membrane; it is especially towards the
heel that it exhibits this character. This excessive thickness appears
to be owing to different layers which are applied upon each other, and
which seem to be superadded to the layer of the ordinary epidermis;
but there is also a real difference, though but little known, in the
organization; for example, when the epidermis has been removed from
these parts by maceration, we cannot see, as in the others, those small
appendices or inequalities regularly scattered over it, and which are
the remains of the broken exhalants. In these places these vessels are
torn smoother on the internal surface of the epidermis, on which are
seen only the traces of the wrinkles of which we have spoken.

I attribute to this excessive thickness of the epidermis of the soles
of the feet and the palms of the hands, the difficulty and oftentimes
impossibility of making blisters act in these places, on which I have
often applied them there, because I thought that the sensibility being
greater, they would produce more effect in some diseases. The failure
of my attempts has compelled me to renounce them.

This thickness takes from the epidermis the transparency it has in the
other parts; it is whitish and opake even on the hand and the foot.
Thus the epidermis which, in negroes not being coloured, allows the
blackness of the subjacent reticular texture to be seen, conceals in
part this blackness in these places. I have observed however, by means
of maceration, that the less deep colour of the soles of the feet and
the palms of the hands depends also in this race upon this, that the
reticular texture is really less coloured. We might say that every
thing relates to animal sensibility in this region, the capillary
net-work of which appears to be less, and in which all the phenomena
that are derived from organic sensibility are much less active.

In examining in this relation the hand and foot of a negro, I have
been led to make upon the colour of the reticular body some other
experiments, which form a short digression. 1st. By plunging into
boiling water a piece of the dermis taken from any part it becomes
twice as black, almost immediately; which is probably owing to this,
that the fibres in approximating by the horny hardening, bring
together the colouring particles, whence arises a deeper black. This
phenomenon is very striking, when the piece plunged into the water is
compared with one that has not been. 2d. Maceration for a month or
two, sometimes removes the epidermis without the reticular body, the
seat of colour, and sometimes detaches the whole together. 3d. Being
immersed for some days in cold water produces no sensible effect. 4th.
Long continued stewing hardly changes at all this colour, after the
deep tinge that has been suddenly given to it. Only by scraping with
a scalpel the external surface of the skin which is then reduced to a
kind of gelatinous pulp, we easily detach the coloured reticular body
from it, which however always remains adherent to a small portion of
the chorion. 5th. Sulphuric acid, which reduces the skin like all the
other organs to a kind of pulpy state, also enables us to remove this
coloured portion easily, which is detached in separate pieces, but the
shade of which is hardly altered at all. 6th. Nitric acid, though very
much weakened, does not facilitate so much the removal of this coloured
portion. It yellows the internal surface of the skin and the epidermis;
but it has appeared to me to produce but very little effect upon the
blackness of the reticular body. 7th. A portion of the skin of a negro,
immersed for twenty-four hours in a solution of caustic potash, has
not appeared to me to have undergone any alteration in its colour. I
have made the same observation when I used a weaker solution. 8th.
Putrefaction detaches the coloured portion of the skin, sometimes with
the epidermis, sometimes alone, but it does not alter its colour. I
have not employed other agents to ascertain the nature of this colour
of the skin of negroes. Let us return to the epidermis, which we have
for a moment lost sight of.

Where it is very thick, as on the concave surface of the foot and
the hand, we see that it is evidently formed by layers added to each
other, and which are separated with difficulty, because their adhesion
is so intimate. Everywhere except in the foot and the hand, there is
but a single layer; no fluid penetrates the epidermoid texture. Cut
in different directions either in the living or dead body, it allows
nothing to ooze through it. Their scales are always dry; no blood
vessel exists in them. The absorbents and exhalants only pass through
it without anastomosing, without winding on its interior before opening
on its surface, as happens in the serous membranes, which on this
account become black by injection, though but little blood appears to
enter them during life. The epidermis on the contrary is never coloured
by this means, even when the injection, being very fine and driven
with success, oozes out on the external surface of the skin. Thus, in
inflammation, in which all the cutaneous exhalants are full of blood
which they do not contain in the natural state, this fluid never enters
the epidermis, which is uniformly disconnected with all the diseases
of the subjacent reticular body, and which, being only raised up by
inflammation, is detached and afterwards renewed.

The epidermis has evidently no nerves. It is also destitute of cellular
texture; thus fleshy granulations, which are formed by this texture,
never arise from this membrane; the excrescences of which it is the
seat have not the character of the different tumours which the cellular
texture especially contributes to form, such as fungi, schirri, &c.

From this it is evident that none of the general systems common to all
the organs, enters into the epidermoid system. It has not then the
common base of every organized part; it is as it were inorganic in this
respect.

The epidermoid texture exhibits no fibre in its interior; it has in
general but little resistance, and is broken by a slight distention,
except on the fingers and the hand where it resists more, on account of
its thickness.

The action of the air hardly alters it at all. Only when it is exposed
to it after having been removed in the form of a large layer, it
hardens a little, becomes a little more consistent, and is torn with
less ease. It is of all the organs, next to the hair and the nails,
that which drying changes the least in the natural state. It also
becomes a little more transparent by it; but resumes its ordinary
state when again immersed in water, which proves that it contained a
little of it in this state. The action of the air, which is so quickly
efficacious upon the skin in putrefaction, leaves it then wholly
untouched. It is only raised up, but does not itself putrify. Separated
in this way and washed to cleanse it of the fetid substances that
might adhere to it, it exhales no bad odour. Kept a long time in moist
air, alone and well separated from the neighbouring parts, it does not
alter. It is, next to the hair and the nails, the most incorruptible
of the animal substances. I have preserved a foot found in a cemetery,
the skin and fat of which are transformed into a fat, unctuous and hard
substance, which burns in the candle, whilst the epidermis, which is
very thick, is hardly changed at all in its nature.

The action of water upon the epidermis can be considered under many
relations. 1st. During life it whitens it, when it is some time in
contact with it, and at the same time wrinkles it at different points.
We often see this phenomenon in the hands on coming out of a bath; but
it is particularly evident after ten or twelve hours application of
an emollient cataplasm, in which the action of the farina is nothing,
and in which it is the water that produces the whole effect. This
whiteness of the epidermis appears to be then owing to its having
really imbibed some of the fluid. It is the same phenomenon that
takes place on the serous, fibrous, membranes, &c. which, having
become artificially transparent by drying, whiten again when immersed
in water. Here the epidermis, naturally transparent, whitens by the
addition of this fluid. In this state it renders the sensibility of
the papillæ infinitely more obtuse; I have often made the experiment
upon myself, by applying a cataplasm in the evening and removing it
the next morning. When the water is evaporated which the epidermis has
imbibed, it again becomes transparent, wrinkles, resumes its natural
state, and allows the sensibility of the skin to be again apparent.
This phenomenon is especially observed upon the epidermis of the foot
and the hand, for it is not often as sensible elsewhere. 2d. In the
dead body, the epidermis separated from the skin, and immersed in
water, whitens also, but does not wrinkle. Left to macerate in water,
it does not undergo any putrid alteration. Only there rises on the
surface of the fluid many particles, which being in juxta-position,
form a whitish pellicle of the nature of which I am ignorant. At the
end of two or three months, the epidermis thus left in water, softens,
does not swell, and is torn with great ease; it is not reduced to a
pulp analogous to that of the other organs thus macerated. 3d. When
stewed, the epidermis does not undergo, at the instant of ebullition,
a horny hardening like all the other organs. Hence why, whilst by this
horny hardening the skin is much diminished in extent, the epidermis
which remains the same is obliged to be folded in different directions.
When the ebullition is continued, this membrane becomes less resisting
and breaks with great ease, but is never reduced to gelatine, does
not acquire a yellowish colour, and does not become elastic like the
organs which furnish much of this substance; besides, we know that the
epidermoid texture does not combine with tannin, and that it is even
an obstacle to it when it tends to penetrate the skin. After long
stewing, the different layers which compose the epidermis of the palm
of the hand, and especially that of the sole of the foot, are separated
with great ease; this is the best way of seeing this lamellated
structure. Between these layers there is often formed on the foot small
vesicles filled with serum.

Caloric produces upon the epidermis phenomena wholly different from
those which the other systems experience from the contact of this
substance. A portion of this membrane well dried by the action of
the air, and exposed to the flame of a candle, 1st, does not undergo
hardly at all the horny hardening, as a portion of skin does when thus
treated; 2d, it exhales a fetid odour analogous to that of burnt horn,
and different from that of all the other textures when subjected to
the same experiment; 3d, it burns with great ease, which does not take
place with any of the preceding systems when dried; it is often even
sufficient to put the fire to it at one end to consume it entirely;
4th, at the place of the flame we see a blackish bubbling fluid, from
which often escapes little burning drops, and which is very analogous
to that of a feather when burnt. It is evidently an oil which supports
the combustion by its great abundance, and which does not appear to
be found in as great quantity as in the hair and the nails. This oil
deserves particular examination; it is that which gives out in burning
so disagreeable an odour, and which forms those burning and whitish
drops of which we have spoken. It appears to be of the same nature as
that which Bertholet obtained from the hair in so great a proportion.
After combustion there is left a blackish charcoal, which I have not
analyzed.

Light does not appear to have a great action upon the epidermis, which
I have found of the same colour, in portions of skin blackened by it,
and in those which have been sheltered from it.

Nitric acid yellows very sensibly the epidermis, more even than any
other animal substance; but it does not dissolve it without great
difficulty. The sulphuric on the contrary acts very powerfully upon
it, especially when it is a little concentrated. When it is drawn out
after having been a short time plunged in, it is found to be very
thin, extremely transparent, and almost similar in this respect to the
pellicle that is taken from an onion. This curious phenomenon has often
struck me. When left too long in the acid, the epidermis is finally
entirely dissolved in it.

The alkaline lies dissolve this membrane, but with difficulty. Pure
alkali has a very prompt action upon it.

Alcohol has no influence upon the epidermis.


III. _Properties._

The epidermis has but very little extensibility, since the least
cutaneous tumour can tear it and raise it up in scales, as in herpes,
or in larger pieces, as from a blister. Yet it is not entirely
destitute of it, as the vesicle proves which is formed by this last.
Its contractility of texture is nothing. We observe, that when no
longer distended, this bladder remains flaccid and never contracts.

Every kind of animal sensibility is foreign to the epidermis. We
know that it can be pricked, cut or torn, without being felt. It is
especially on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet that
these experiments are easily made. The thickness of this membrane is
such in this place, that we can remove layers of it, as we see done by
those who try the edge of an instrument, that it is possible even, as
most cooks do, to put it in contact with live coals, and that it is not
impossible to carry a red hot iron over it. It is by this insensibility
that it blunts the action of the acids, the caustic alkalies, and of
all the powerful stimuli, which when in contact with the dermis laid
bare by a blister, give excessive pain.

The epidermis differs from all the other organs that are destitute,
like it, of animal sensibility, as the cartilages, the tendons, the
aponeuroses, &c. in this, that it is never capable of acquiring it;
whereas the others, if a little excited, often take a degree of it
superior to that of the organs which naturally possess it. Whence does
this arise? From the fact, that in order that the animal sensibility
may arise in an organ it is necessary that the rudiments of it should
be there already, and that this organ should enjoy organic sensibility,
which, when raised by irritation is transformed into animal; now the
epidermis appears to be destitute also of this last property, as well
as of insensible contractility. In fact, 1st, there is no sensible
circulation in it. 2d. The exhalants and absorbents which go through
it, are wholly foreign to it. 3d. No morbid phenomenon, that supposes
organic sensibility, appears in the epidermis. It does not inflame;
it is passive in all cutaneous affections, and never partakes of them
notwithstanding its continuity. The impossibility of inflaming makes
it an obstacle, wherever it exists, to cutaneous adhesions, which
cannot take place until it is removed. Its internal surface, raised by
a blister, and reapplied to the dermis by the evacuation of the serum
of the vesicle by means of a small puncture, never unites again. 4th.
The excrescences of which it is the seat, as corns, some indurations,
&c. are inert and dry like it, and without internal circulation; if
they are painful, it is from the pressure upon the subjacent nerves,
and not from themselves. 5th. No sensible operation is performed in the
epidermis; it is worn incessantly by friction, like inorganic bodies,
and it is afterwards reproduced.

This continual destruction of the epidermis has not sufficiently
arrested the attention of physiologists. The following are the proofs
of its reality; 1st, if with the blade of a knife, we scrape strongly
its external surface, a large quantity of powder is removed which
sulphuric acid easily dissolves, and which is greyish. The epidermis
whitens a little in this place, then resumes its colour, especially if
it is moistened. By scraping again, we do not remove any more powder,
it is necessary in order to obtain it, to wait twelve or twenty hours.
2d. This substance becomes superabundant, when the skin has not been
washed for a long time. Hence why those who soak their feet that have
not been cleaned for a long time, detach so great a quantity of it. It
is especially on the sole of the foot that this substance is formed
in abundance. We often observe in dead bodies that it forms almost a
layer in addition to the epidermis, but which is very distinct from
it, and can be removed with ease. I attribute this circumstance to the
thickness which the epidermis has in this place. We should no doubt
find as much upon the hand, were it not for the continual friction
of this part. We see it often on the patients in hospitals, after
remaining a long time in bed without having been cleansed.

Water naturally removes this substance, that is produced by the
destruction of the epidermis, and, which, mixing with the residue of
transpiration, that the air cannot carry off by evaporation, renders
bathing, as I have observed, a natural want. Though it may be neither
exhaled nor absorbed, and though its production may appear to be
owing to mechanical friction, yet we can, in its relation, consider
the epidermis as an emunctory of the body, since it is renewed by a
substance coming from the dermis, as fast as it is removed.

It is evident, as the epidermis has no vital properties, that it cannot
be the seat of any kind of sympathies, which are aberrations of these
properties. Hence its life is extremely obscure, I doubt even if it
possesses vitality. We might almost say that it is a semi-organized
body, inorganic even, which nature has placed between external
inanimate bodies and the dermis, which is completely organized, in
order to assist their passage and guard against their force.

The epidermis has a property very distinct from those of most of the
other systems; it is that of being reproduced when it has been removed.
It grows anew and is formed again with an appearance exactly similar to
what it first exhibited; it is that which makes it differ from all the
other systems, as the cellular, which throw out vegetations when they
are laid bare, but which are only reproduced in an irregular manner,
and wholly different from their natural state. How is the epidermis
thus reproduced? Is it the pressure of the atmospheric air which
renders the external surface of the skin callous? Is it the air, which,
by combining with the products which escape from this surface, forms a
new compound? I know not. What is certain is, 1st, that this production
is wholly different from that of the internal organs; 2d, that it
cannot take place except upon the skin, and that the fine pellicle
that covers all the other cicatrized parts, after a wound with loss
of substance, does not resemble it at all and presents even a texture
wholly different. Thus this pellicle is not raised up by the different
means which raise the epidermis; thus it often becomes the seat of
acute sensibility which is never the case with the epidermis. This is
what takes place especially in changes of weather, a time in which the
cicatrices become, as we know, very painful; I have often observed,
that not only the interior, but the pellicle even of the cicatrix are
then sensible. Besides, when this pellicle is formed, red blood vessels
evidently penetrate it, whilst nothing similar is observed in the
formation of the epidermis.

It is this faculty of reproduction which is put in action in many
epidermoid excrescences, as in corns, and callosities which have
nothing in common but the name with those which form the edge of
fistulas, &c. All these excrescences are insensible, without vessels or
nerves, of the same consistence and the same colour as the epidermis;
they are often removed from it and afterwards formed again. It appears
that external pressure has much influence upon their development; too
narrow shoes and the solid bodies which are used on the hands of smiths
and other workmen are the frequent cause of them.

I preserved a great part of the skin of a man who died at the Hôtel
Dieu, and his epidermis, which was treble the thickness from his birth
and even in the womb of his mother, that it is in the ordinary state,
had been subject during his life to a continual desquamation which
made the whole of it appear as if covered with herpes, though nothing
similar to this affection existed upon the dermis, which was perfectly
sound. The face alone was exempt from this defect of conformation.

The epidermis is not only reproduced when the whole of it has been
removed, but also when the superficial layers alone have been taken
away, especially on the foot and the hand on which other layers arise
upon those which the cutting has laid bare; which proves that they are
not, as has been said, the juices of the reticular body which form it
by drying.


IV. _Development._

Those who have thought that the epidermis is formed by pressure, would
be convinced that this is not the case if they would examine that of
the fœtus, which is very distinct, more even in proportion than many
other systems. We observe it when the skin begins to leave the pulpy
state of which we have spoken. At the end of the fifth month, it has
proportions analogous to those which it will afterwards exhibit. It is
very thick on the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands, and
very thin elsewhere; it is easily detached by all the means we have
pointed out. We know that in a fœtus that has died and become putrid
in the womb, it is found in great measure detached. At the place of the
umbilical cord, it is continued in an insensible manner with the skin.

At birth, though it is in contact with a fluid that is new to it, it
does not undergo a great alteration; which proves that the air has
little or no agency in its formation. It becomes thicker as we advance
in age, and follows, in this respect, nearly the same proportions as
the skin. Beyond the twenty-sixth or thirtieth year it increases no
more. I have often raised up in many places the epidermis of an old
person; it has not appeared to me to differ much from that of the
adult; it is a little more subject to scale off and it is a little
thicker. In some miserable objects which come to hospitals, there is
often vermin in cracks of the epidermis, whose layers are afterwards
separated by them and in which they live; so that I have seen the
epidermis in this way conceal thousands of little animals, which were
evidently found between the layers of this membrane, and which were not
upon the reticular body and the papillæ. It is the only means that has
shown to me the lamellated structure of the epidermis, in any other
place than on the foot and the hand, in which I have never seen vermin.

The cracks of the epidermis in old age appear to arise from its dryness
owing to the want of exhalation; it is that which renders the skin so
rough and harsh. What contributes to it also is, that as it has many
inequalities on account of its numerous folds, frictions being more
felt in these prominent places, make the epidermis scale off; thus in
the adult the same cause renders it scaly on a tubercular skin, whilst
a skin that is smooth and well distended with fat, undergoes every kind
of friction without desquamation.


ARTICLE SECOND.

INTERNAL EPIDERMIS.

All authors have admitted the epidermis of the mucous membranes.
It appears that most have believed that it is only this portion
of the skin which descends into the cavities to line them. Haller
in particular is of this opinion. But the slightest inspection is
sufficient to show, that here as upon the skin, it forms only a
superficial layer over the papillary body and the chorion. Boiling
water which detaches it from the palate, the tongue and the pharynx
even, enables us to see the two other layers.


I. _Epidermis of the origin of the Mucous Surfaces._

The epidermis is very distinct upon all the origins of the mucous
system, upon the glans, the entrance of the anus, the urethra, the
nasal fossæ, the mouth, &c. It is demonstrated in these places by
the excoriations that take place there, upon the lips especially, by
dissection with a very fine lancet, by the action of boiling water,
maceration, putrefaction and even epispastics, as is proved by the fact
that the ancients employed this method to make the edges of a hare-lip
raw. The delicacy of this epidermis is much greater than on the skin;
and as it is more in the interior this delicacy increases. It is to
this circumstance that must be attributed the ease with which different
remarkable modifications are produced through this membrane, when in
galvanic processes, we arm with zinc the surface of the tongue and with
another metal the mucous surface of the conjunctiva, the pituitary
membrane, the surface of the rectum, the gums, &c. and bring in mediate
or immediate contact these different metals.

The mucous epidermis is quickly reproduced when it has been removed.
Destitute of every kind of animal and organic sensibility, it is in
this respect, destined like the skin, to defend the very sensitive
papillary body that is subjacent to it. It is to its presence upon the
mucous membranes, that should be in part attributed the faculty they
have of being exposed to the air, and even to the contact of external
bodies, without exfoliating or inflaming as in preternatural anus,
prolapsus of the rectum, &c.; whilst the serous membranes cannot bear
this contact with impunity.

Besides, the nature of the mucous epidermis is the same as that of
the cutaneous. Submitted to the action of the same agents, it gives
the same results. The excrescences formed on its surface are also
analogous, though much more rare. It becomes callous by pressure.
Chopart relates the case of a shepherd, whose urethra became so, from
frequently introducing a small stick to procure pleasure. We know the
density that this covering has in the stomach of the gallinaceous
animals, and in certain cases in which the mucous membranes come out
of the body as in prolapsus of the rectum, the vagina, the womb, &c.
Sometimes in those cases the pressure of the clothes produces in this
epidermis a thickness evidently greater than what is natural to it; it
is this which then makes these membranes lose in part the bright red
that characterizes them in the interior.


II. _Epidermis of the deep seated mucous surfaces._

The epidermis gradually becomes more delicate, and is soon almost
insensible, on the internal mucous membranes. 1st. In the stomach, the
intestines, the bladder, the gall-bladder, the vesiculæ seminales, in
all the excretories, &c. the most delicate instrument cannot raise
it up. 2d. In the maceration and ebullition of the mucous system of
these parts, I have never seen the epidermis raised up on its surface.
3d. I have drawn out of the abdomen of a dog a portion of intestine;
its mucous coat has been laid bare by an incision, and I have applied
an epispastic to it; more redness was seen upon the free surface of
this coat, but no pellicle was raised up from it. 4th. We do not see
in preternatural anuses, complicated with inversion, excoriations
analogous to those of which the surface of the lips, that of the glans,
&c. are the seat. 5th. I have already had frequent occasion to open
bodies affected with acute or chronic catarrhs of the intestines,
the stomach, the bladder, &c.; now I have never seen the epidermis
separated by inflammation, as happens after erysipelas, phlegmon, &c.
upon the cutaneous organ. 6th. We do not see upon the deep seated
mucous surfaces those exfoliations, desquamations, &c. so frequent upon
this after many affections.

From all these considerations it would appear, that the epidermis does
not exist upon the deep seated mucous surfaces, and the great quantity
of mucous juices constantly poured out by the subjacent glands,
supplies its place in defending the papillæ and the chorion from the
impression of substances heterogeneous to the economy, contained in
the internal cavities. Yet there is a circumstance that would seem to
demonstrate the existence of the epidermis upon the deep seated mucous
surfaces; it is the separation of preternatural membranes, which are
often detached from these surfaces, and which may be considered as a
kind of epidermoid exfoliation. Many authors give examples of these
membranes formed either upon the bladder and voided by the urethra,
or upon the stomach and œsophagus and thrown up by vomiting, or upon
the intestines and expelled with the alvine evacuations; Haller has
collected many cases. Dr. Montaigu informed me that he saw a membrane
vomited up, which formed a sac without a rent, exactly analogous to
that of the stomach whose internal surface it lined. Desault saw a sac
almost analogous to the bladder, voided by a patient who was affected
with retention of urine.

I confess that I have made no observation on this point, so that I
cannot say what is the nature of these membranes. But authors in
general agree in attributing to them a soft and pulpy nature, which
does not appear to me to accord with that of the epidermis. I have
many times seen at the Hôtel Dieu white membranes detached from the
œsophagus after poisoning with the nitric acid. But these membranes
are evidently the superficial portion of the mucous organ, which is
disorganized, and thrown off by suppuration which takes place below. It
is thus that cutaneous eschars fall off in the form of membranes from
large burns; in this way the osseous layers are formed in necrosis,
which are only the superficies of the bone that dies and is detached in
a lamellated form.

From this, the existence of the epidermis of the deep seated mucous
surfaces appears to me to be very uncertain, and cannot be admitted
till a new examination, which will, I think, prove rather against
than in favour of its existence. What is the place in which the
epidermis terminates that lines the origin of the mucous surfaces,
or if it exists everywhere, where does it begin to become no longer
apparent from the action of our different reagents? We cannot, I think,
determine with precision; it diminishes in an insensible manner, and is
lost as it were by degrees.


ARTICLE THIRD.

OF THE NAILS.

All the fingers have at their extremity, on the outer side or that of
extension, hard, transparent and elastic layers, of the nature of the
horns of many animals, and which are called nails.


I. _Forms, Extent, Relations, &c._

The nails of man differ from those of most other animals, in their
breadth and want of thickness. The first makes them better adapted to
support the extremity of the fingers, which is broader than in most
animals for the perfection of touch; the second renders them less fit
to serve for defence or as a means of aggression.

Most people cut their nails even with their fingers, so that the length
of these bodies which is seen is not what is natural to them. When
allowed to grow, they lengthen and turn over on the side of flexion,
and cover entirely the lower end of the fingers. This growth has a
certain limit which the nail cannot pass, and which it attains when it
exhibits at its extremity a cutting and sharp edge. As long as this
edge has the appearance of having a part cut off, the nail continues to
grow.

We usually think that the habit of cutting our nails is a thing of
mere decorum. But if we reflect a little upon society and the numerous
arts to which it gives rise, upon the perfection, delicacy, precision
and rapidity of the motions which the fingers are often forced to
execute, upon the necessity of approximating them, crossing them in
a thousand different ways, &c. we shall soon see that this habit is
almost inevitably the result of the social state, and what appears to
us the effect of fashion is that of necessity. The sense of touch in
man in a natural state is coarse and obscure; it is only necessary that
he should seize objects destined for his nourishment, his defence, his
aggressions, &c. that he should climb especially and attach himself to
trees to keep himself upon them; now his nails are for this purpose
of great use. What he loses in this respect in society, he seems to
gain by the precision and extent which are added to his touch, and
by the faculty which the fingers acquire of distinguishing the most
delicate tangible qualities. In the first state, his hands are of great
assistance to him in locomotion. In the second, they contribute hardly
at all to this use, and they gain in the partial motions of their
fingers what they lose in their motions as a whole, which become of
less urgent necessity.

The nail has three distinct parts in the natural state; one posterior,
concealed on both sides by the integuments; another middle, free only
on one side, and the third anterior, without adhesion at either side.

The posterior portion of the nail is nearly a sixth part of its extent.
Its convex surface adheres very intimately to the epidermis, which
goes in the following manner to fix it. After having covered over the
portion of the finger corresponding with flexion, it is reflected
upon the concave edge where the skin terminates and where the nail
begins to become external; it commonly forms all around this edge a
kind of small string that is very distinct and has a small groove in
the top of it, and which is evidently composed entirely of epidermis,
since we can cut the whole of it without giving any pain, and which is
afterwards easily reproduced. After having formed this string, which
is in the form of a parabola, the epidermis is again reflected, passes
between the skin and the nail, and is glued, if we may so say, to the
concave surface of the latter, without being intermixed with it; for
we can remove it with ease by scraping with a scalpel. So that the
dermis which covers the superior portion is really between two layers
of epidermis. After having thus fixed the nail, and having arrived at
its posterior edge, the epidermis is continued and identified as it
were with this edge, whose evident delicacy and softness approximate it
in nature to this membranous layer. Hence it follows that without the
adhesion of the epidermis to the nail, there would be between them, a
kind of cul-de-sac. Some authors have thought that the extensor tendon
is extended as far; but it is easy to see that it does not go beyond
the tubercle which terminates behind the phalanx. The nail does not
reach this tubercle, there is a space of three lines between them. The
concave surface of the posterior portion of the nail corresponds with
the same substance as the middle portion.

This middle portion is bare on its convex surface, which is smooth,
whitish behind where this colour forms a kind of half moon, reddish in
the greater part of its extent, a colour which is foreign to it and
which it derives from the subjacent texture. Upon the sides, the skin
covers this surface a little, and terminates afterwards by continuing
the concave and free edge of which we have spoken. The epidermis forms
also in this place a small string which is continued on each side with
that pointed out above; then it unites to the nail and adheres to its
lateral edges with which it is identified. The concave surface of
this middle portion is fixed in front by the epidermis, which, after
having covered the extremity of the fingers, and having arrived at the
place where the nail ceases to be free, is separated from the dermis,
and adheres to the whole length of the nail in a curved line; then by
mixing with it, it seems to form its internal lamina. The dermis on the
contrary is continued on the convexity of the last phalanx, has there a
remarkable consistence, a reddish appearance, and a texture like pulp
and wholly different from what is observed elsewhere; more vessels run
through it; there is no distinct space in it, and no elongation goes
from it to the surface of the nail of which the epidermis forms a part.
We do not see on this surface, as on those of the other parts of the
epidermis, those threads, which are the remains of the broken exhalants
and of which we have spoken; thus the sweat never passes through the
nail. There is neither any oily oozing upon its surface; whence it
follows that water is not formed into little drops on the exterior of
its horny laminæ. Hence the nail is evidently insulated from all the
other organs except the epidermis, with which it is continued on its
concave face and especially on its posterior and lateral edges. Thus
observe that when collections of pus or other affections have broken
this continuity behind or on the sides, the whole of the nail, though
unaffected in the middle falls off.

The free or anterior portion of the nail is of a length which it is
difficult to determine. I have never seen it allowed to take its
natural growth. I have only observed that if it is permitted to grow to
a considerable size, we see evidently that it has a greater thickness
than the posterior and middle portion. In general, the thickness,
resistance and hardness of the nail increase in a gradual manner from
the posterior to the anterior part; we shall now examine to what this
is owing.


II. _Organization; Properties, &c._

In order to observe the organization of the nails advantageously, it is
necessary to take those that are very distinct, as those of the great
toe, the thumb, &c. We then see evidently that a single lamina occupies
the whole of their convex surface. Behind, this lamina exists alone;
hence the extreme thickness of the nails at this place. But as we
examine towards the front, we see new laminæ successively added to it,
on the concave surface; so that the nail becomes successively thicker.
These laminæ can be easily raised up layer by layer. The most anterior
are the shortest. They often exhibit upon the concave surface of the
nail an infinite number of very evident small striæ, all longitudinal
and parallel, and which make us attribute to it a fibrous texture. At
other times this arrangement is less evident.

What is the nature of the laminæ which form the nails? I believe that
they are almost precisely the same as the epidermis. What proves it
is, 1st, that the most superficial is evidently continued with it by
its edges; there is no intermediate agent between them. 2d. I have
already observed that the nails are detached, and then regenerated
exactly like the epidermis. They have two modes of increase; one in
length, when we cut their extremities; the other in thickness, when we
detach only a lamina, which is soon formed again. When the whole of the
nail comes off, all the portion of the dermis which covers the back of
the last phalanx, contributes at the same time to form it anew by its
external surface. 3d. There is the same obscurity in the vitality of
the nails as in that of the epidermis. No trace of animal sensibility
is discoverable in them. The excruciating pain that is experienced
when they are pulled out arises solely from the sensibility of the
subjacent pulpy texture; it is from the same cause as in pulling out
the hair. There is no organic sensibility, no internal circulation and
consequently no heat inherent in the texture of the nails; thus the
horns of animals are nearly of the same degree of temperature as the
atmosphere, whilst some external productions with evident vital forces,
though raised up like horns, have a temperature equal to that of the
body. Such are the combs of the cock of our country, and those which
are more striking of the cock-turkey. Compare these excrescences with
those on the feet of these animals, which are horny, and the difference
of temperature is evident. 4th. The nails give out when burning a
disagreeable odour, analogous to that of the epidermis under the same
circumstances; they exhibit then the same phenomena. Their combustion
is supported, like that of the epidermis, by an oil of which they
contain a great quantity. 5th. If maceration and stewing do not produce
upon the nails that want of consistence, that kind of brittleness,
if I may so express myself, which they produce upon the epidermis, it
appears to be owing only to their greater solidity. 6th. The action of
the nitric, sulphuric acids, &c. has exhibited to me nearly the same
phenomena as upon the epidermis.

Every thing then appears to establish the most exact analogy in
the composition, organization and properties of the nails and the
epidermis. There is no doubt a difference of principles between them,
since the appearance is not the same, and since, though many epidermoid
layers may be in juxta position as on the soles of the feet and the
palms of the hands, they do not exhibit the form and texture of the
nails; so that we cannot consider these as mere layers of epidermis
applied to each other. Chemists must ascertain what these differences
are, which are certainly very slight. Thus nature often employs
indifferently the two organs for the same uses; it is thus that on the
sole of the foot of man and many analogous species, there is a thick
epidermis; whilst on the feet of animals with hoofs, we see a horny
substance of the nature of the human nail.

An evident proof of the slight degree of internal motion which is
going on in the epidermis and the nails, of the kind of inertia in
which they are in relation to the constant motion of composition and
decomposition, which constitutes nutrition, and of the insensibility
which they exhibit to various excitants, is the ease with which they
are penetrated by different colouring substances, and the very long
time they retain them. We know this effect with regard to the nails
of dyers. Many savage people who paint the face, various parts of the
body, and often even the whole of the external surface of the body,
preserve for a long time, without a new coat, the colour which they
have artificially given themselves. I have removed the epidermis of
a portion of skin of the arm of a dead body, which was coloured blue
during life; this colour was not only on the surface of the membrane,
but penetrated the whole of it, like a piece of cloth that had been
soaked in it. Yet the pores were as evident as before, and the sweat
could pass through them; I presume this secretion goes on as usual in
savages who paint the skin. Thus the cloth which is immersed in a dye,
has not its pores closed by it. I may make use of this comparison, as
the epidermis and the nails are really species of inorganic bodies. Lay
any organ bare and paint it in this way; the colour, together with the
contact of the air will irritate and inflame it, and the suppuration
arising from this inflammation will soon throw out the colouring
particles, which nutrition would have done, if inflammation had not.
There is a means however which can perpetuate the colour, even upon
organs, which, very sensible like the skin, are constantly subject to
the double nutritive motion; it is that of using the colours with a red
hot iron. It is in this way I am convinced that the letters or coloured
figures which most soldiers mark upon themselves, with a red hot pin,
have their seat not only in the epidermis, but also in the chorion
itself.


_Development._

The nails have in the fœtus a very considerable consistence, whilst
the skin is still pulpy; but their tenuity is then extreme. But they
thicken and acquire greater consistence as the fœtus increases in
size. They have not at birth a length proportionable to what they are
afterwards to have. They do not extend beyond the ends of the fingers
which are often much the longest; so that it is not till after birth
that they are bent over and exceed the fingers in length, for both of
these would be useless in the womb of the mother, as there is nothing
there for the fœtus to seize upon. Their transparency allows us
evidently to see, at the moment of birth, first the black colour of the
blood which before circulated in the arteries, and then the vermilion
colour which respiration suddenly imparts to it. As we advance in age,
the nails grow in the same proportions as the epidermis, but they have
nothing peculiar in their growth. In old people they become extremely
thick.

These organs experience during life those diseases only which
are analogous to those of the epidermis. These are excrescences,
augmentations of size, &c. and other productions, the texture of
which is precisely the same as that of the nail, and in which there
is neither more sensibility, nor more circulation, nor more heat, nor
more life; a remarkable character which distinguishes them from those
tumours which arise upon the other organs with very active vitality, as
upon the skin, the muscles, &c. tumours the texture of which is very
different from that of the organs which have produced them, and which
most usually have properties entirely different. But the epidermoid
excrescences are in every respect analogous to the epidermis.




PILOUS SYSTEM.


The adjective by which I characterize this system, is derived from the
latin substantive which signifies the organs of which it is composed.
Hair is found less generally upon man than upon most other animals.
It forms upon them a kind of covering external to the skin, which,
lessening in part the contact of external bodies, makes the cutaneous
animal sensibility perform a less important part, and establishes
less numerous relations between these bodies and them. External life
is then, in this respect, more limited in them than in man, in whom a
delicate epidermis and a few hairs thinly scattered over it, separate
the organ of feeling from surrounding objects, the least impression of
which is felt, and which, owing to this, keep the animal sensibility
in permanent activity; thus man is designed to live more without than
within himself. The pleasures of reproduction and digestion constitute
exclusively the happiness of animals. That of man is in part the
result of them; but an order of pleasures wholly different, purely
intellectual and in relation only with external sensations, enlarges
immensely by its presence, and contracts by its absence, the field of
this happiness.

The hair of man covers especially the cranium, some parts of the face,
the front of the trunk, the genital organs, the extremities, &c. The
quantity varies remarkably, as well as the form, length, &c. In order
to form an accurate idea of it, we shall now consider it separately in
the different organs, we shall then treat of its general organization,
properties and development.


ARTICLE FIRST.

EXAMINATION OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM IN THE DIFFERENT REGIONS.

This system must be considered on the head, the trunk and the
extremities.


I. _Pilous System of the Head._

The head is the part of the body in which this system predominates;
it covers the whole cranium and defends it against the impression of
external bodies, as the hairy coat of quadrupeds defends them. Thus
this part is the least capable of exercising the sense of touch, either
from the obscurity of the animal sensibility arising from this hairy
covering, or because its convex form allows it to be in contact with
external bodies only by a small surface.

The face is less generally covered with hairs, though many are found
upon it, especially in men. This part, in which in a very small space
are collected the greatest number of our means of communication with
external objects, viz. the organs of taste, smell, sight and even
hearing, has but very little to do with the sense of touch, on account
of its villous arrangement. Its form is also badly adapted to this
sense. The mouth which is flattened cannot be applied to external
bodies. Thus whilst the snout which is elongated in most quadrupeds,
performs the double function of first feeling all bodies, turning them
in various directions in order to ascertain their tangible qualities,
and then of seizing them for nourishment, the mouth of man serves only
for this last use; it is the hands which are destined for the first.
Thus observe that all animals, even the most of those with clavicles,
almost uniformly direct their snout towards the earth, whilst the mouth
of man is naturally destined to an opposite position.


_Of the Hairs of the Head._

They occupy upon the cranium all the space which corresponds with
the occipital, parietal, the squamous portion of the temporal and a
small portion of the frontal bones. Their limits do not vary on the
sides; they always correspond above the ear. Behind, they sometimes
go down upon the superior part of the neck; at others, they do not
extend beyond the head. In applying blisters on the ligamentum nuchæ,
we observe in this respect, almost as many varieties as there are
subjects. We know how variable these limits are in front. Sometimes
extended lower down, sometimes carried higher up, sometimes describing
a curved line, and at others forming a real triangle the anterior point
of which corresponds with the median line, they have really nothing
constant.

These inequalities alone determine the breadth or narrowness of the
forehead, whilst its degrees of inclination depend solely upon the bone
which forms it. It is in this way that the hair contributes a little
to the expression of the face; I say a little, for it is less to the
breadth of the forehead than to its approximation to a perpendicular,
that we attach the ideas of majesty and greatness which characterize
heroes and gods. The poets, as we know, have particularly celebrated
the forehead of the god of thunder. Observe in relation to this subject
that there is a great difference between that which expresses majesty
or abjectness in the face, from that which serves there to express the
passions. It is the osseous structure of this region and the degree
of inclination resulting from this structure, which serve for the
first use, and it is especially the muscular motions which contribute
to the second. Why? Because majesty, grandeur, &c. are especially
connected with the extent of the understanding, and the understanding
has its seat in the brain, and because the various capacities of the
cranium, which contain this organ, and which correspond with its
various degrees of development, have inevitably an influence upon the
different dimensions of the face. Now as the bony structure is a thing
constant and invariable, the air of majesty or abjectness remains
always imprinted upon the face. On the contrary, the passions which
especially affect the epigastric organs, which afterwards excite the
facial muscles, have necessarily a transitory expression.

The number of hairs is very variable on the same surface. In some
people they are very close together and even all touch; in others more
thinly scattered, they allow in part the skin of the cranium to be seen
in their interstices, a circumstance which is either owing to original
conformation, or to a disease which makes them fall out in part. They
have, like the nails, a determinate growth which they do not exceed.
We know but little of the limit of this growth. Yet we have seen them
reach to the waist, the thighs, and the legs even. It appears that
in women they have a greater growth; we might say, that nature has
compensated this sex in this way for the want of hair in many other
parts. Floating upon the shoulders, the breast, the trunk, &c. they
form in the natural state a sort of protection from the injuries of
the air and the light. Their extent evidently proves that man was
destined to an erect attitude. In fact, in the attitude of quadrupeds,
they would trail much upon the earth, and form an obstacle to motion.
The hair of no animal, I believe, in a natural attitude retards his
progress so much, as the hair of man then would.

Man, who opposes nature in every thing, has made it a habit in most
societies to cut the hair, the beard, &c. By common people, it is
considered merely a thing of fashion; by the physician, as a practice
which has perhaps a greater influence than is thought upon the
functions. In fact, in the natural state when the pilous system has
once acquired its growth, it no longer exhibits the constant motion
of composition and decomposition. On the contrary, in man who cuts
it, it is constantly the seat of this motion and of that of growth.
This practice perpetuates then the phenomena which take place in them
in infancy, and consequently keeps up there a more active work, which
perhaps is performed at the expense of that of many other parts.

The natural difference of the hair has much influence upon its length;
that which is smooth and curls but little is in general the longest.
The more it has the opposite characters, the shorter it is, as is
proved by that of negroes and those white people whose hair curls like
theirs.

The tenuity of the hair is very great, yet its resistance is in
proportion very considerable. There is no part in the economy, not
even those of the fibrous system, which can support so great a weight
in proportion to its size. Thus woven strings of hair would have an
enormous resistance, if they were sufficiently long to be employed for
different uses.

The colour of the hair varies remarkably according to country,
latitude, climate, temperature, &c. This colour is even, like that
of the skin, a characteristic attribute of the different human races.
Naturalists have been much occupied with this subject, and I refer to
their works.

In our climate the principal colours are black, flaxen and bright red.
They are, as it were, the three general types to which may be referred
many particular shades. The black has under it the brown, the chesnut,
&c. The flaxen is connected on the one hand with the bright red and on
the other with the chesnut. The bright red which touches the flaxen by
one of its extreme shades, goes by an opposite shade to the natural
colour of certain flames.

All physicians have considered the colour of the hair as among the
characters of the temperaments. Black indicates strength and vigour.
The figure of a wrestler with flaxen hair would be almost ridiculous.
This colour is the attribute of weakness and delicacy; it floats upon
the head of figures which painters have made strangers to the great
passions, to powerful and heroic deeds; it is found upon the figures
of young people, in pictures where laughter, sport, grace and pleasure
preside over the subjects. These two colours, black and flaxen, as
well as their secondary shades, are found distributed among women in
nearly equal proportion; now reflect upon the kind of sentiment this
sex inspires according to the colour of the hair, without regard to
any other consideration, and you will see that a woman with flaxen
hair creates a sentiment which beauty and weakness united seem to
dictate. The epithets that we employ express this double attribute. On
the contrary, the term brunette announces in her that it designates,
a mixture of force and beauty. Beauty is then a common gift which
attracts us, but which, differently modified by external forms,
attracts us by touching, interesting and exciting us. Eyes in which
langour is depicted, are frequently associated with flaxen hair; whilst
black hair is almost always met with, in those whose vivacity and
sparkling seem to proclaim an excess of life which seeks to be diffused.

Habit which accustoms us to every thing, changes our taste in regard
to the colour of the hair, as it does to that of our dress. Black,
flaxen and their numerous shades are in turns fashionable in France;
and as the organization does not change with our taste, we have
contrived artificial hair; a happy means, which seems to subject to our
inconstancy the invariable course of nature, and which, changing at our
will the expression which the physiognomy borrows from the hair, can at
every instant exhibit man under forms which fashion extols to day, and
which ridicule pursues tomorrow. Now among these numberless variations
which succeed each other among us in the fashion of the hair, bright
red and its various shades never find a place. Most people have a
decided aversion to it. It is almost, in our eyes, a mal-formation to
be born with it. This opinion is too general not to have some real
foundation. The principle appears to me to be the usual connexion
between the hair and the temperament and of course the character which
results from this; now the kind of character connected with this kind
of hair is not commonly the happiest, though there are many exceptions
to this principle, which is proverbial. Another reason for the aversion
to hair of a bright red, is that the oily fluid which lubricates it
often exhales a fetid odour foreign to the other kinds of hair.

What is the relation that can exist between the hair and the character?
Has the first an influence upon the second? No; the following is the
way in which it should be considered. Every man has his peculiar kind
of organization and constitution. This forms the temperament; now, to
each kind is attached on the one hand this or that species of hair, and
on the other the predominance of some internal viscera, which though
less apparent is not less real. This predominance disposes evidently
to certain passions, which are the principal attributes of character;
then the colour of the hair and character are two different results
from the same cause, viz. constitution; but one has no influence upon
the other.

The hair coming out of the cutaneous pores has such a direction, that
that of the anterior part of the cranium is almost always oblique
in front, and tends to fall over the forehead; that of the middle
and posterior part pierces the skin perpendicularly, and that of the
posterior and inferior part traverses it obliquely, so as to fall
naturally down the length of the posterior part of the neck. It is the
same with that of the sides, which its direction as well as its weight,
carries upon the region of the ear which it covers.


_Eyebrows._

Upon the arch which borders the orbit above, is found a collection of
hairs forming a portion of a circle more or less evident, which shades
the eye and defends it from the too powerful impression of the rays of
light. The hairs of the eyebrows are thicker together in persons of
dark complexion, than in those of light. More numerous within, they
sometimes unite together the two eyebrows upon the nasal prominence,
and thus shade the root of the nose. Fewer without, they there cause
the eyebrow to terminate in a point. All are obliquely directed
from within outwards. Sometimes towards the internal side, they go
perpendicularly forwards. Their length is scarcely more than half an
inch; they do not exceed this except in some extraordinary cases. Their
colour is usually, though not invariably, the same as that of the hair.
They are firmer, more resisting and larger than the hairs of the head.
If they were longer they would curl like the hairs on the genital
parts, of the nature of which they partake.

The eyebrows enjoy two evident motions. 1st. They are depressed and
carried inwards, by forming over the eye a very evident arch. 2d. They
are raised up and separated from each other, by expanding the parts
around the orbit. The length between the extremes of these two motions
is nearly an inch. The first motion takes place to defend the eye
from a very bright light. It expresses also the melancholy and gloomy
passions; hence the reason no doubt why the same word is applied to
the moral state of the mind, and to the row of hairs of which we are
treating. Observe on this subject that the sanguineous and choleric
temperaments, which are the most disposed to the passions which make
the eyebrows contract, are precisely those in which the hairs that
compose them are found in general the most evident. The second motion
enables us to receive upon the region of the orbit a great quantity
of the rays of light; it allows us to raise the upper eyelid to a
great extent in order to open the eye wide, which the first evidently
prevents. It expresses also the gay passions, those which dilate the
face. Painters have studied more than anatomists, the different degrees
of elevation and depression of the eyebrows.


_Eyelashes._

Upon both eyelids there exists a small row of hairs, a little longer
than those of the eyebrows, of the same nature as them, directed
obliquely forwards, crossing each other when the two eyelids are
brought together, and serving to defend the eye from the small
particles floating in the air. In general they do not curl; when they
do and turn towards the eye, an irritation ensues, and they must be cut
off. Sometimes a bad direction is the cause of this irritation.

I would remark on the subject of the eyelashes, that all the openings
of communication with the interior, as those of the meatus auditorius
externus, the nose and the anus, and oftentimes also the orifices of
the lactiferous tubes, are surrounded with a great number of hairs
which defend these openings from external bodies. Around the mouth the
beard takes the place of these hairs; the urethra has none, but the
prepuce at its orifice is instead of them.


_Beard._

The males of most animals are distinguished from the females by some
external productions. The comb of the cock, the mane of the lion, the
horns of the stag, &c. are examples of these distinctive characters.
In man, the beard is the principal attribute of the male. It occupies
all the chin, the sides of the face, both lips and the superior part
of the neck. It leaves the cheeks bare as well as the parts around the
eyes; thus observe that it is there that the passions are principally
depicted, the expression of which would be concealed by the hairs, if
the lower part of the face was the seat of them.

The beard, not so long in general as the hair of the head, is longer
than that of every other part of the body. It is very commonly of the
colour of the first, though more rarely flaxen and is more frequently
of a bright red, which it often is in persons with flaxen hair. The
nature of the hairs of the beard is the same as that of the hairs of
the genital parts, the eyebrows, &c. They curl, are stiffer, more
resisting and uniformly less oily than the hair of the head.

The quantity of beard varies remarkably in different men. Those in whom
it is abundant and of a deep black are in general strong and vigorous.
Observe also that the strongest males in the different species of
animals are those, in whom the external production which distinguishes
them from the females, is the most conspicuous. We might say that this
characteristic production is the index of the strength or weakness of
their constitution. A small lion has not a noble mane; great horns
belong to a well made stag, and long, twisted ones to a good formed
ram. Observe that it is not the same with the other hairs common to
the two sexes. Often in a weak man, those of the arms, the thighs, &c.
are as evident and even more numerous, than in the most muscular.

The habit of cutting the beard as most Europeans do, of preserving
it like the Asiatics and of dressing it in different ways like the
Chinese, gives a different expression to the face which characterizes
the people. A masculine, vigorous physiogomy which expresses strength
and energy, cannot be deprived of this external attribute without
losing a part of its character. That of the Orientals exhibits an
appearance which coincides with the strength of their bodies, and
forms a contrast with the effeminacy of their manners. I do not know
if, in consulting the history of the different people who allow their
beard to grow, and that of nations who cut it, we might not be tempted
to believe that muscular force is to a certain extent connected with
its existence, and that this force is always diminished a little when
we are constantly deprived of it. Every one knows the vigour of the
ancients, that of the people with long beards, and that even of certain
men who, among us, allow their beards to grow in conformity with the
laws of monkish institutions. No doubt many causes may make weakness
exist with a beard; but in a general view I think we can admit that
there is a certain relation between it and strength. Take from a cock
his comb, which is the characteristic of the male, as the beard is that
of man, and he will lose strength. I am persuaded that we might take
from the lion a part of his power by taking away his mane. We know
the result of the experiments of Russel upon the castration of stags;
their horns, after this operation have grown in an irregular manner,
or have not even grown at all. This external attribute of the male in
this species, appears as we know at the period of virility, when the
vital forces are increased. It is the same with the human beard. This
coincidence would alone prove that the use of this last is to serve
for an external character to the male sex. The eunuch, whose powers are
feeble, loses also oftentimes much of his beard.

Such are our prejudices in regard to the idea we form of beauty, that
we ridicule what is really and absolutely so, for that is certainly
so which indicates organic perfection. A peacock without his tail of
emeralds, a ram or a stag without their horns, displease us; why does
not man without his beard?


II. _Of the Pilous System of the Trunk._

The hairs on the trunk are very variable. Some men appear as it were
shaggy, whilst others are almost without hairs. There are more of them
generally on the anterior than on the posterior part of the trunk. It
is principally along the linea alba and upon the chest, that they are
found in man. This last part is in general destitute of them in woman,
who has usually very few on the trunk.

Both sexes have a very considerable quantity on the genital parts. They
are there, as I have said, of the nature of the beard. Less frequently
flaxen than the hair of the head, as frequently of a bright red, they
are most usually black. They are, next to the beard, the longest hairs.
They have generally no determinate direction; each hair almost has a
different one. Few animals, like man, exhibit this excess of hair upon
the genital parts. There is a great difference in individuals as to its
quantity. The blackness and abundance coincide in general with strength.


III. _Pilous System of the Extremities._

Man has many hairs upon the whole surface of his extremities. The
proportion of number is nearly the same in all; but the length varies
very much; in some, they form only a down; in others, they are a little
longer; whilst in others, they are nearly of an inch in length, reach
over each other, and give the extremities a shaggy appearance.

At the top of the superior extremities, there is in the hollow of the
axilla a collection of hairs which are longer than the others, and are
nearly of the nature of those of the genital parts. Nothing similar is
seen on the inferior extremities.

The pilous system does not exist on the internal part of the arm and
fore-arm in many men, in whom we see it only behind and on the sides.
It is more uniform on the inferior extremities. The back of the foot
and hand always have hairs. They are never seen on the sole of the one
or the palm of the other; a circumstance of essential advantage to the
perfection of touch.


ARTICLE SECOND.

ORGANIZATION OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM.

Whatever varieties exist in the form, size and arrangement of the
hairs, their organization is nearly the same in all. We shall now
examine this organization in a general manner. Chirac, Malpighi and all
anatomists since them, have explained very well in some respects, and
very badly in others, the structure of the hairs of the head, which is
nearly the same as that of all the other hairs. The following is what
careful dissection has shown me concerning it.


I. _Origin of the Hairs._

The hairs of the head, and in general all the hairs, arise from a
sub-cutaneous fat, or the cellular texture of the parts which are
destitute of this fluid. Each is contained at its origin, in a kind
of small membranous canal, the nature of which is perfectly unknown
to me, and whose transparent parietes allow the hair to be plainly
seen, when we have separated them with a delicate scalpel from the
surrounding parts. This small cylindrical canal accompanies the hair to
the corresponding pore of the skin, insinuates itself into this pore,
passes through it, extends to the epidermis and is intermixed there
with the texture of this membrane, but goes no further. The length of
this canal, and consequently of the course which the hair runs under
and in the skin, is nearly five lines in the hairs of the head. There
is no adhesion between the hair and the internal surface of this small
canal, except at the enlarged base of the first where, it receives its
nourishment. Thus, by opening the canal at this place, and destroying
its adhesions there, the hair becomes free, and is drawn from without
inwards with great ease, by taking hold of its enlarged end with small
forceps. In this way, the canal is insulated. I have thus dissected and
separated, upon a surface of two inches, a very great number of these
canals which appear, when nothing but them is left on the internal
surface of the skin, like so many small elongations of it.

Are there vessels and nerves in this small cylindrical sac which
contains the origin of the hairs? We see distinctly elongations going
to its external surface, especially towards its extremity opposite
to the skin; but dissection does not teach us the nature of these
elongations. I have never been able to trace them to a neighbouring
vessel or nerve. Haller has not been more successful, though he speaks
of authors who have traced nerves to the origin of the hairs. I presume
however that these elongations are especially vascular. Is there a
fluid between the origin of the hair and its covering? By opening
the latter, nothing escapes, though some authors have pretended the
contrary. Besides, if this fluid is in the form of dew, as upon the
serous surfaces, it cannot be distinguished.

It is in the middle of this small cylindrical sac, of which I have just
spoken, that the origin of the hair is found. We see at its extremity
an enlargement oftentimes almost insensible, at others very evident,
though always less than has been said. This enlargement is of the same
colour and nature as the hair itself. It adheres to the canal very
probably by the vessels and perhaps the nerves it receives from it. The
hair which arises from it goes through its canal without adhering, as I
have said, to its parietes, passes with it through the oblique pore of
the dermis, leaves it at the epidermis, and goes outward.

All authors say that the hair does not pierce the epidermis, but only
raises it up, and that this forms a sheath which accompanies it to its
extremity. This assertion is incorrect; in fact, 1st, the hair is as
thick in its canal of origin as it is out of it. 2d. This canal being
opened at its extremity opposite to the skin, we can draw out of it,
as I have said, the whole hair with great ease, and without the least
resistance; which would not be the case however if the covering of the
epidermis was to be broken. It appears that from the enlargement of
its extremity, the hair has no adhesion either in the sub-cutaneous
canal, or in its passage through the skin, or the epidermis. 3d. If the
cutaneous epidermis was raised up to cover the hair, this would have a
treble thickness, unless this epidermis became wonderfully thin upon
it. 4th. We do not see this pretended rising up by drawing out a hair
of the head; on the contrary a depression exists at the place where
this comes out. The cutaneous epidermis furnishes nothing then to the
hairs, though the nature of them may be in part the same as its own,
and it is proper to consider them as uniform in their structure from
one extremity to the other.

Under the skin, through it and out of it, the hair is composed of two
distinct parts. One external, forms a canal which extends from the
enlargement of the dermoid extremity to the opposite one; the other
internal, which composes as it were the medulla of it, is of an unknown
nature.


II. _External Covering of the Hairs._

The external covering of the hair appears to be of the nature of the
epidermis. It has in fact almost all the attributes of it. 1st. The
hairs of the head burn exactly like this membrane, give out when
burning an analogous odour, and leave after combustion a similar kind
of coal; now it is principally to the external portion that these
phenomena are owing. 2d. Water penetrates the hairs with great ease;
hence very useful hygrometers can be constructed with them; now the
same is true of the epidermis; and moistened hairs in foggy weather
present in this respect a phenomenon analogous to that of the epidermis
softened, wrinkled and whitened by the contact of a cataplasm. 3d. It
is by means of the epidermoid covering that the hairs are foreign to
life, that they are insensible and never become the seat of any acute
or chronic affection. 4th. This covering is white, whatever may be the
colour of the hairs. The cause of the colour resides in the internal
medulla; thus the epidermis of negroes and that of white people differ
but very little. Hence why when the internal substance of the hair has
disappeared, the canal remaining alone exhibits a more or less evident
whiteness. 5th. In this state, though the interior of the hair may be
dead, the epidermoid exterior, which is independent of it, preserves
most commonly the faculty of growing when it is cut; thus the cutaneous
epidermis is truly foreign to all the subjacent diseases of the skin.
6th. I presume that it is this covering which gives to the hairs of the
head the property of remaining so long uninjured. When removed far from
the access of the air, they remain unaltered for ages; they have not
in them the principle of decomposition of the other animal substances.
They never become putrid either in air or water. Thus we have seen that
the cutaneous epidermis never undergoes putrefaction, which seizes upon
the subjacent parts.

It appears however that the hairs are more unalterable than the
epidermis, and that there is even a difference of nature between them.
In fact, 1st, maceration and ebullition, which make the epidermis very
easy to be broken, though they soften it but little, leave the hairs
with their usual resistance, unless carried to degrees that I have not
tried. By boiling and macerating them comparatively with the epidermis,
we easily make this observation. 2d. The acids act less efficaciously
upon the hairs than upon this membrane; but the alkalies dissolve them
with as much and even more ease. 3d. A thread of epidermis of equal
thickness would be incomparably less resisting than a hair. 4th. The
hairs can, like the epidermis, be painted of different colours; but
they do not retain them so long, and on this account the colour must be
renewed oftener.

Some modern authors have said that there is detached from the external
covering of the hairs a kind of scales which form as it were little
branches to them. We do not see these elongations. However the
experiment mentioned by Fourcroy, and which consists in this, that by
rubbing a hair between the fingers, it is raised like the heads of
some species of grain in the direction from its base to its point, this
experiment, I say, appears to prove the existence of these insensible
elongations, which perform also an essential part in the adhesion of
the hairs of the head to each other, an adhesion that is such that when
they have remained a long time without being separated, as in long
diseases, it is only done with the greatest difficulty.

Sometimes the hairs are bifurcated in a very evident manner at their
extremity.

It is the greater or less thickness of the epidermoid covering of
the hairs, which constitutes the different nature of them. Thick
and compact on the genital parts, the chin, &c. it is less easily
penetrated with water, and renders the hairs more elastic there and
more capable of curling. Loose and thin in the hairs of the head, it
makes them more smooth, and gives them more sensibly the property of
the hygrometer. It is the peculiar nature of this external covering,
which gives to the hairs of the head and the hair of negroes the
character which distinguishes them.

From what we have just said it is evident that the external covering of
the hairs of the head is the part of them which is essentially inert
and foreign to life. It is not the same with their internal substance.


III. _Internal Substance of the Hairs._

This substance is the most important; it is this which essentially
characterizes the hairs, which I should have ranked in the epidermoid
system, if they had nothing but their external covering, as is the case
when they become white.

We are entirely ignorant of the nature of this internal substance. It
can only be presumed that there are extremely delicate vessels inclosed
in the common epidermoid covering containing a colouring substance,
which stagnates in these vessels, or at least is subjected in them to
a very slow nutritive motion. Among these vessels, do any of them as
on the skin, open outwards to throw off fluids? Many physiologists
have thought so, and on this account they have considered the hairs as
real emunctories. I do not believe that we have any anatomical data
upon this point; but the plica polonica, a singular disease in which
the hair when cut pours out blood, evidently proves that they have
exhalants in a natural state, which then becoming enlarged and dilated,
pour out a fluid that they before refused to admit. Besides, there is
no doubt that the pilous exhalants, infinitely less active than the
cutaneous, are a much less copious emunctory. As to the absorptions
which some have pretended are made by the vessels of the hairs, I think
that nothing can prove them.

From what we have just said upon the internal substance of the hairs,
it appears that it has a true analogy with the reticular body of the
skin, and that, like it, it arises from two sorts of vessels, one in
which the colouring matter stagnates, the other which gives passage, in
some cases at least, to fluids, and in which there is consequently a
kind of circulation.

The colouring substance of the hairs has some analogy with that of
the skin. Thus we observe that the first, like the second, is blacker
in warm climates and nearer the equator than in colder ones; thus
red hair is frequently found with freckles which are more or less
abundantly spread upon the skin of some people, and which are evidently
seated in the reticular body, as I have ascertained in many patients
who had these marks, and in whom the epidermis was raised up either
by erysipelas or a blister. The acids however change the colour of
the hair more than they do that of the skin of negroes. The muriatic
whitens at first the hairs of the head which become yellow in drying;
the nitric yellows, and the sulphuric leaves them black.

That which especially interests us in the internal substance of the
hairs, is the real vitality which it enjoys, and which essentially
distinguishes it from the external covering. It is to this character
that must be referred the following phenomena.

1st. The different passions of the mind have a remarkable influence
upon the internal substance of the hairs. Often, in a very short time,
grief has changed the colour of it, and whitened it by occasioning no
doubt the reabsorption of the fluid contained in the small capillary
vessels. Many authors have related facts of this kind. Some, even
Haller, have doubted them. But I know at least five or six instances
in which a discoloration has taken place in less than eight days. The
hair of a person of my acquaintance became almost entirely white in
the course of a night upon the receipt of melancholy intelligence. In
these changes, the epidermoid covering remains the same, preserves its
texture, its nature and its properties; the internal substance only
is altered. It is said that terror can make the hair stand an end;
painters express it even by this external attribute; I know not to what
extent we should give belief to this phenomenon which I have never
seen; but it is an opinion too generally received not to have some real
foundation. Now if fear acts so powerfully upon the hair, if it can
give it a real motion, is it astonishing that grief and pain should
suddenly change the fluids that are found in it, and deprive it even of
these fluids?

2d. The plica polonica, of which I spoke just now, in which the hairs
of the head become, when they are cut or even when they are not, the
seat of a bloody exhalation, and in which they have a remarkable excess
of life, evidently resides in the internal substance; the epidermoid
covering has no connexion with it. Some authors even say that this
internal substance acquires sometimes a fleshy nature; then their
covering is raised up in scales.

3d. We know the danger of cutting the hair after many acute diseases. I
have already seen a melancholy instance of it. Many physicians, Lanoix
in particular, have related others. Now, to what are these accidents
owing? It is certainly not to the contact of the air, from which the
hair defends the head; for these accidents take place, though the head
may be covered. It can only be owing to this, that the growth of the
hairs that are cut, calls to these organs a vital activity which the
internal viscera soon sympathetically feel; hence the pains of the
head, the affections of the eyes, &c. observed in these cases. It is
a species of active sympathy exerted by the hair upon the viscera;
now, every organ which sympathizes has a real vitality, and enjoys
very distinct vital properties. The epidermis never takes part in
sympathies, because it is almost completely inert, is hardly organized,
is not at the level of the other organs, and cannot consequently
correspond with them. The danger of cutting the hair after severe
sickness, gives me opportunity to observe that it is often as dangerous
to remove suddenly the vermin from the heads of children during these
diseases. I have seen three or four instances of accidents from this
cause.

4th. The hairs not only influence other systems, but are also
influenced by them. This is what we often see after acute diseases,
in which the roots sympathetically affected, repel the fluids that
come to nourish them, die, and the hairs fall out. Observe that this
falling out of the hair very rarely takes place at the same time with
the desquamation of the epidermis; which proves, that the generally
admitted opinion of the origin of the external covering of the hairs is
entirely false, and that, though very analogous to the epidermis, this
covering does not arise from it, as I have said.

5th. Many animals lose at one season of the year their hairy covering,
which is afterwards reproduced; now the period of its regeneration
is often that of many diseases, and almost always that of a greater
weakness than at other times. We might say that the nutritive work
which then calls to the exterior much vital force, diminishes this
force in the other regions. Man is not subject to these annual renewals
of the external productions which cover his body, like birds, many
quadrupeds, reptiles, &c. It is a cause of less diseases. In fact,
a thousand different causes would no doubt have frequently deranged
these renewals in society, as a thousand causes disturb the menstrual
evacuation, &c.; hence the various diseases we escape by the want of
this renewal. Man is in general subjected to fewer causes of natural
revolutions, than most animals.

6th. Heat and cold have also oftentimes an influence upon the internal
substance of the hairs. We know that in some animals, as rabbits,
hares, &c. they become white in the winter and resume their original
colour in the summer.

7th. A short time after painting the hairs of the head black, a fashion
now more common in France than at the period in which they powdered
them, there is often experienced pains in the head and a swelling of
the hairy scalp, though the skin has been in no way concerned, has not
been pulled, and the hair only has been affected.

It follows from all we have just said, that the hairs analogous, by
their external covering, to the epidermis; foreign by means of it,
if we may so say, to life, belong to it much more particularly by
their internal substance, a substance whose nature is yet but little
known, as I have already said. What moreover evidently proves this
assertion, is that the phenomena of which I have just spoken, and to
which I could add many others, cease to be evident in persons, in
whom the hairs having become white, have no longer any thing but the
epidermoid covering, the internal substance having in part disappeared;
particular observation proves this. It may be however that in this case
that portion alone of this internal substance, corresponding to the
colour, is destroyed, whilst that which is the seat of the exhalations
continues to live as usual; and, in this respect, white hairs may
experience vital phenomena, of which, I believe, there are a few
examples. But all this is subordinate to the future experiments, which
will elucidate the pilous structure more than it now is.


ARTICLE THIRD.

PROPERTIES OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM.

The hairs experience but a slight degree of the horny hardening when
exposed to the action of caloric. They then turn in various directions,
curl and twist; but this arises from a cause entirely different from
that of the horny hardening of the other organs. The caloric then
removes the moisture with which the hairs are constantly penetrated,
and thus approximates their particles. Thus when the hair is moistened
by fog, a bath, &c. the curls disappear. The oily substances that
are used at the toilet, give a coat that is insoluble in water, and
preserve the curling, by preventing it from penetrating the hairs. Some
time after the head has been washed, they curl more, as we have had
occasion to observe since the Grecian head dresses have been in fashion
among us. This at first appears to be contradictory, but it is not
so. In fact by then rubbing the hairs much, the unctuous substance is
removed, which always surrounds them, or this substance combines with
the soap, if the water contains it, as is often the case; by this means
it easily penetrates the hairs, the pores of which remain open, and by
afterwards evaporating with the fluids that were already there, and
which the unctuous substance retained, it leaves these organs more dry
than they were, and consequently more disposed to curl.

A proof, that it is the epidermoid covering which thus imbibes the
moisture that it afterwards loses in the state which succeeds the
curling, is, that the detached epidermis can be curled with a hot iron,
and afterwards rendered supple by soaking it in water.

The contractility and extensibility of texture are very indistinct in
the hairs; it is their resistance which prevents their rupture; they
can hardly be stretched at all.

They have no animal sensibility when pulled; the pain that arises from
it has its seat especially in the skin through which they pass. Thus
when drawn opposite to their direction, we suffer much more than by
stretching them in the direction of their pores. I do not deny however
that these elongations, which fix their origin to the neighbouring
parts, may be also the seat of pain when the hairs are pulled. These
organs have no animal contractility.

The organic properties certainly exist in their internal substance.
The changes which this substance undergoes can only depend on the
different alterations which affect these properties. The organic
sensibility and the insensible contractility especially are raised in
it in a remarkable degree in the plica polonica; now in order to have
the degree of energy which they then do, they must have existed there
in a natural state. It is these two properties, that, the sympathies of
which we have spoken, put into action. The organic contractility is
nothing in the hairs.

Yet we cannot deny that in the natural state, these organs are, next
to the epidermis and the nails, those in which life is the least
active, those which have the least numerous relations with the other
organs. Whilst every thing is destroyed in most of the other systems by
diseases, this is most often unaffected by them; it grows as usual, and
appears to be in no wise disturbed; it has then a manner of being, of
existing, wholly different from the others.

In general, the external productions of animals, as the feathers, the
hair, the scales, &c. seem to form a separate class of organs, foreign
to the life of the internal organs; it is almost like the different
species of mosses that grow upon trees, without making essentially a
part of them.


ARTICLE FOURTH.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM.


I. _State of this System in the First Age._

In the first months of the fœtus there are no hairs on the skin which
is then gelatinous. It is when the fibres of the dermoid texture are
formed, that there begins to appear on the head a light down, an
indication of the hairs which are afterwards to arise. This down is
whitish and concealed by that fatty and unctuous substance, which we
have said is deposited on the external surface of the skin at this age.
Soon this down, which appears to be but the external covering of the
hairs, which is then of extreme tenuity, begins to be coloured black
or flaxen, according to the tint that is afterwards to predominate;
it is the internal substance that forms it. The colour remains faint
until after birth. At this period the hairs are often more than half an
inch long. Upon all the rest of the body there is only the down, the
precursor of the hairs; the face especially has much of it. The hairs
of the head are then in advance at one period of the other hairs, in
their growth.

After birth the hairs grow much more rapidly than before. It is
precisely the reverse of most of the other parts, whose growth is
more rapid in the womb of the mother. During the whole of youth this
system has a tint less deep, than it is afterwards to have. The flaxen
becomes nearer the chesnut, and this nearer black, and the first tints
of the bright red grow many degrees darker towards the period from
the twenty-sixth to the thirtieth year. The light tints are to the
pilous system in youth, what the imperfectly developed forms are to
the muscular, cellular, &c. Oftentimes that which is to be afterwards
flaxen, approaches a whitish tint, which is owing only to the nature
of the internal substance, and not to its absence in old age. Thus the
white of the Albinos depends also upon the peculiar species of this
internal substance. Many hairs are wanting upon the body of the young
man.


II. _State of the Pilous System in the following Ages._

At puberty there is a remarkable revolution in this system which
becomes almost double. The hairs of the genital parts are formed; the
beard which is, as I have said, the characteristic attribute of the
male in the human species, is also then developed. We might say that
there was the same relation between the hairs of the neighbourhood
of the testicles and those of the beard, as between the testicles
themselves and the organs of the voice, between the womb and the mammæ.
The beard is, in this respect, the external sign of virility. Some time
before it comes out, we see under the skin the sac which contains the
origin of the hairs; it is already very evidently formed, and permits
the principle of the organ to be seen which it is to contain, as I have
oftentimes ascertained; thus the sac of the tooth exists a long time
before the tooth is cut.

At the same time the hairs of the axilla grow also; those of the trunk
and extremities, which were then almost in a state of down, become
larger, assume a determinate colour, and increase even much in number.

Why does puberty occasion this general growth in the pilous system?
This is asking the reason of all the other phenomena which appear at
this period. I would only observe that the hairs of the head, the
eyebrows, the eyelashes and the hairs at the openings of the body, are
those which are the least affected by this revolution. Besides, this
growth is gradual; it requires at least two or three years for the
beard to become what it is always to be.

In the following ages the hairs undergo but few changes; they grow in
proportion as they are cut in different parts, and are the seat of a
constant external work; now, observe that this work is more prompt, and
the growth of the hairs consequently more rapid, in summer in which the
cutaneous organ is especially in action, than in winter in which it is
contracted; an additional proof of the real vitality of the organic
forces of the internal substance of the hairs.


III. _State of the Pilous System in Old Age._

Towards the end of life, the pilous system is affected by the general
obliteration which takes place in almost all the external vessels;
it ceases at first to receive the colouring substance. The internal
substance dies, the epidermoid covering remains alone; the hairs become
white. The hairs of the head appear the first, and are the first to
die. The beard, the hairs of the genital parts and then those of all
the parts of the body afterwards die. Besides, there is a great variety
among men as it respects the period in which the hairs whiten; in some,
this phenomenon begins about the thirtieth year, and even sooner, in
others it is towards the fortieth, fiftieth or sixtieth. A thousand
causes arising from the passions of the mind, from diseases, aliments,
&c. can have an influence in society upon this premature death, so
common in many men, but which does not take place in animals, who are
not exposed from their kind of life, to the same revolutions, until the
last years.

The hairs, after remaining white for a longer or shorter time, finally
fall out; then the sac which covered the origin of them flattens down
and entirely disappears. I have examined many bald heads; the skin of
the cranium was perfectly smooth on its internal surface, though it
had been separated from the cellular texture. No trace is discoverable
there of the innumerable appendices which the canals form, after the
hairs they contain have been drawn inwards. I have also dissected a man
who after a putrid fever had become almost entirely bald. There were
all these little canals entire, and in the bottom of them could already
be seen the rudiments of new hairs. There is then this difference
between the falling out of the hairs of old people, and that which
is the consequence of diseases, that every thing dies in the first,
because the vessels which go to the root cease to transmit fluids to
it; whereas in the second case the hair alone falls out, and its sac
remains.

It is a pretty generally received opinion that the hair, the nails and
the epidermis continue to grow after death. We have, I think, but few
data respecting this singular phenomenon. I am however certain that I
observed a real elongation of the hairs of a chin of a head that had
been carefully shaved, and which I macerated eight days in a cellar.
An attendant of the dissecting room, who prepares many heads for
the bones, informed me that he had often made the same remark, when
putrefaction is prevented for some time. What is certain also is, that
the growth of the beard is not in the direct ratio of the vital forces;
in the diseases which affect these forces with a general prostration,
it grows as much as in those in which there is a general exaltation
of these forces. We remark this in hospitals where at the side of an
inflammatory fever, there is often found a putrid or slow nervous
one. Besides, why should there not be sufficient tonic forces left in
the hairs to grow some time after general death, as there is in the
lymphatics to absorb, &c.?

The different phenomena which the hair, the epidermis, the skin, and
in general all the external organs experience in the successive ages,
are wholly owing, like those of the internal organs, to the laws of
nutrition, and not to the action of surrounding bodies. This is an
essential difference between organic and inorganic bodies. The latter
are gradually altered in two ways by the contact of external bodies
which act upon them, 1st, mechanically by friction, tearing, &c. &c.;
2d, chemically, by combining with them, as for example, the air whose
different principles undergo many combinations which change its nature
and that of the bodies with which it is in contact. In this respect
all inorganic bodies grow old. At the end of some time, they have no
longer the exterior which characterized them in the beginning. Observe
monuments, pictures, engravings, earths, metals, stones, &c. &c. every
thing which in the arts, commerce, sciences, in the uses of life or
in the phenomena of nature is formed of any inert bodies, whether
these bodies have never lived, or having lived, have not been able to
preserve themselves after death, as the solid portions of vegetables,
the bones, the horns, the hair of animals, &c. every thing finally has
the indelible stamp of time; every thing grows old; every thing loses
its freshness, every thing changes on the exterior of inert, as well
as on that of organic bodies; but as in the first surrounding bodies
alone have acted, the internal part is still young, whilst the external
is old, if I may be allowed to use two very improper words. Thus the
rock whose surface is blackened by the lapse of years, is the same in
the interior as when it was created. On the contrary in animals and
vegetables, the internal organs are worn out, as well as the exterior.
Time is marked upon the viscera, as well as upon the forehead of the
aged. Surrounding bodies act upon us, wear out life, if we may so say;
but it is as stimuli that they exert their action; it is by exhausting
the sensibility and contractility, and not by combination, mechanical
contact or friction. Language ought to express this difference. We do
not use the term _young_ when viewing the exterior of a new building,
a new garment, or a picture recently painted; why do we say an _old_
monument, an _old_ piece of cloth, &c.? if it is a metaphor, very well;
but this word cannot express a state analogous in its nature, to that
of an old animal, an old plant, &c.


IV. _Preternatural Development._

There are three principal cases in which the hairs are preternaturally
developed in the economy.

1st. Sometimes they are formed on the internal surface of the mucous
membranes; they have been seen in the bladder, the stomach and the
intestines; many authors have given cases of them. I have found them
upon the calculi of the kidney. I have seen in the gall-bladder at one
time a dozen of nearly an inch in length, and which were evidently
implanted in its surface.

2d. There is often seen on the skin preternatural collections of
them, which are usually a defect from birth. These collections are
particularly observed upon some of those productions or irregular
excrescences, that are called nævi materni. There was exhibited at
Paris, six years since, an unfortunate person, who had from his birth
his face covered with hairs almost like those of a wild boar; and to
whom there came on at the age of thirty-six years, that particular
species of elephantiasis, in which the skin of the face increased in
size, exhibits, if we may so say, the features of the lion, a species
which I have since had occasion to observe upon a natural skin. This
double circumstance gave to the face of this man an air of ferocity
which it is impossible to describe. Many of the stories circulated by
the vulgar concerning men with the heads of wild boars, bears, &c. are
nothing but these nævi in the face, with a growth of hair upon them.

3d. Hairs are often preternaturally developed in cysts, in those of the
ovaria especially. A great many instances have been related. Haller in
particular has collected many; I have seen two. The following is what
they exhibit; a considerable large sac contained many very distinct
small balls, analogous to those of the dung of sheep, formed by a
fat, unctuous, whitish substance, very different in its appearance
from ordinary fat. On the internal surface of this sac were implanted
many hairs, which the least force could remove, because they hardly
penetrated below the surface. These hairs were black. Many already
detached were found crossed in different directions, in the small balls
of fatty matter, which was like spermaceti; for it very much resembled
the substance into which the fat is changed by maceration.


END OF THE LAST VOLUME.




ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS.


VOLUME FIRST.
                                                                   PAGE.

  Preface by the Translator.                                           5

  Preface by the Author.                                           _ib._


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

 Of Animate and Inanimate Beings.—Of their Laws.—Of the Sciences which
 treat of their Phenomena.                                             9


 I. _General Remarks upon the Physiological and Physical Sciences._

 The differences between these sciences are derived from the properties
 which preside over the phenomena.—The necessity of always connecting
 the second with the first.—Periods at which this progress commenced in
 the physical sciences. False applications made to the physiological
 sciences.—The necessity of following in these the same course as in
 the others.                                                           9


 II. _Of the Vital Properties, and their influence upon the phenomena
 of the Physiological and Physical Sciences._

 Vital properties considered in the series of living beings.—Of those
 which animate plants.—Consequences in regard to their diseases.—Of
 those which belong to animals.—Consequences in regard to their
 diseases.—Examination of each vital property under the relation
 of the diseases over which it presides.—Necessity of referring to
 these properties the action of medicines.—Uncertainty of the Materia
 Medica.—Each vital property has a particular class of medicines which
 act upon it.—Proofs.—Inconveniences of describing morbid phenomena
 and those of medicines in too general a manner.—Consequences of the
 preceding remarks.                                                   13



 III. _Characters of the Vital Properties, compared with the characters
 of the Physical Properties._

 Extreme variableness of the first, invariableness of the
 second.—Consequences of this principle as it regards the
 phenomena.—There can only be diseases where there are vital
 properties.—Why.—The progress of the physiological and physical
 sciences wholly different in this respect.—Differences between
 animate and inanimate solids and fluids.—The vital properties become
 exhausted, the physical do not.—Consequences.—The latter are inherent
 in matter, the others are not.—General remarks upon the enumeration
 of the differences of animate and inanimate bodies.—Particular remark
 relative to sympathies.—Their general phenomena.                     23


 IV. _Of the Vital Properties and their Phenomena considered in
 relation to the Solids and the Fluids._

 Division of the fluids into those of composition and those of
 decomposition.—The vital properties are seated essentially in the
 solids.—These are the seat of almost all the morbid symptoms.—The
 fluids however may be affected.—Different attributes of the fluids
 of composition and of those of decomposition in diseases.—How the
 alterations of the first may take place.—Of those of the second.—Of
 the cases in which the solids and the fluids are primarily
 affected.—Division of diseases in this view.—The question must
 necessarily be considered in many points of view.—What is true on
 one side is not so on another.—Of the vitality of the fluids.—What
 it is.—Their alterations affect their vitality.—New proofs of these
 alterations.—How the fluids are assimilated and altered.             29


 V. _Of the Properties Independent of Life._

 Properties of texture.—Of contractility by the horny hardening.—Of
 the agents which put it into action.—It is of two kinds.—Characters
 of each.—Their differences.—Almost all the solids undergo the horny
 hardening.—Condition which it requires.—Of the horny hardening during
 life and after death.—Difference of this contractility from the
 others.—General remarks.                                             38




 VI. _General Observations upon the Organization of Animals._

 Of the simple systems.—Necessity of considering them
 abstractedly.—Their difference of forms.—Their variety of
 organization, 1st, in the peculiar texture; 2d, in the common
 parts.—Manner of knowing these differences.—Differences of the
 vital properties and of texture.—Of the peculiar life.—It cannot be
 understood of the compound organs, but of the simple systems.—Examples
 which prove this assertion in the different organs.                  44


 VII. _Consequences of the preceding Principles relative to Diseases._

 Each texture can be separately affected in an organ.—This even almost
 always happens.—Various proofs of this assertion.—Observations upon
 different diseases.—Sympathies do not take place in an organ as a
 whole, but in some one texture of this organ.—Why.—Of sympathetic
 fevers.—The different inflammations vary in each texture.—Phenomena
 of the different kinds of virus variable from the same cause.—Yet
 the different textures of the same organ have a certain dependance
 upon each other.—Proofs.—Diseases chronic and acute.—Differences
 of diseases in each simple system.—Two classes of symptoms in the
 local affections.—Their difference.—Varieties of the pain, heat,
 &c. according to the systems.—What should be understood by acute
 and chronic affections in the simple systems.—Influence of these
 considerations upon morbid anatomy.—Defects of the old divisions.—New
 manner of considering morbid anatomy.                                49


 VIII. _Remarks upon the Classification of the Functions._

 Table of this classification.                                        60


 SYSTEMS COMMON TO ALL THE APPARATUS.


 _General Observations._

 Division of the systems.—Systems common to all the apparatus.—Their
 characters.—They form the nutritive parenchyma of the organs.—Remarks
 upon nutrition.—Diversity of the nutritive substances.               77




 CELLULAR SYSTEM.


 General Remarks.—Division.                                           87


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONSIDERED IN RELATION TO THE ORGANS.


 I. _Of the Cellular System exterior to each Organ._

 Division of the organs in relation to the neighbouring texture.      88

 _Of the Cellular System which adheres only to one side of the organs._

 _Sub-cutaneous cellular texture._—Arrangement of this texture,
 1st, upon the median line; 2d, in the different regions of the
 body.—Varieties of density and laxity. Uses of the sub-cutaneous
 texture.—Its fluids.                                                 88

 _Sub-mucous cellular texture._—Difference of this texture from the
 preceding.—The density of that.—Consequences.

 _Sub-serous cellular texture._—It is in general loose and
 abundant.—Why.—Place where it is dense.                              92

 _Cellular texture exterior to the arteries._—Its peculiar nature is
 analogous to that of the sub-mucous texture.—Its relations with the
 arterial fibres.

 _Cellular texture exterior to the veins._—It is analogous to the
 preceding, only less thick.—Remarks.

 _Cellular texture exterior to the excretory ducts._—The same structure
 and arrangement as in the preceding.                                 96

 _Of the cellular system considered in relation to the organs that
 it surrounds on all sides._—Cellular atmosphere.—Fluids of this
 atmosphere.—Insulation of the vitality of the organs.—Of this
 atmosphere considered as a means for the propagation of diseases.—It
 favours the motion of the parts.                                     96


 II. _Of the Internal Cellular System of each Organ._

 Arrangement of this texture.—Its uses.—Its different proportions.   102




 ARTICLE SECOND.

 OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM CONSIDERED INDEPENDENTLY OF THE ORGANS.


 I. _Of the Cellular System of the Head._

 _Cellular texture of the cranium._—It is almost nothing within.—Its
 communications.—Consequences of these communications.—It is more
 abundant without.

 _Cellular texture of the face._—It is very abundant.—Its uses.—Its
 communications, &c.                                                 104


 II. _Of the Cellular System of the Trunk._

 _Vertebral cellular texture._—It is not abundant in the cavity of
 the canal.—On the exterior, there is but little behind, and more in
 front.—Consequences.

 _Cervical cellular texture._—It is abundant.—Its
 communications.—Consequences.

 _Pectoral cellular texture._—It is found especially upon the median
 line.—Its communications.—External texture.

 _Abdominal cellular texture._—Of the parts in which it is most
 abundant.—Its communications.

 _Cellular texture of the pelvis._—It is very
 abundant.—Why.—Consequences.—Its communications.                    108


 III. _Of the Cellular System of the Extremities._

 Its different proportions in the superior and the inferior.         112


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 OF THE FORMS OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM, AND THE FLUIDS IT CONTAINS.


 I. _Of the Cells._

 Their form.—Their capacity.—Their communication.—-Experiments.—Of the
 cellular permeability.—In what sense it should be understood.       114


 II. _Of the Serum of the Cellular Membrane._

 Proof of its existence.—Its evaporation.—It varies in the
 different regions.—Method of ascertaining the proportions of
 it.—Experiments.—Nature of this fluid.—Experiments.                 117


 III. _Of the Cellular Fat._

 _Natural proportions of the fat._—Varieties of its proportions
 according to the regions, organs, systems, &c—Its peculiar arrangement
 in childhood.—Varieties according to the other ages.                119

 _Unnatural proportions of fat._—Its preternatural abundance indicates
 weakness.—Different proofs.—Of the causes of the diminution of
 fat.—Remark upon this diminution.                                   121

 _Different states of the fat._—Its degree of fluidity is not
 during life in proportion to temperature.—Its consistence in young
 animals.—Consequences.—Its alterations by age, diseases, &c.        125

 _Exhalation of fat._—Different opinions.—The fat is
 exhaled.—Proofs.—Nature of this fluid.—Relation of its uses with the
 places where it exists and with those in which it is wanting.       127


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture peculiar to the organization of the Cellular System._

 Filaments and layers from which it results.—Method of seeing them
 to advantage.—Their nature.—Essential difference in the cellular
 organization.—There are two species of cellular texture.            129

 _Composition of the cellular texture._—Experiments upon this
 texture.—Action of the air, water, caloric and the gastric
 juices.—Experiments.—Of the gases sometimes extricated in the cellular
 texture.                                                            132


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Cellular Texture._

 _Blood vessels._—The inaccuracy of injections in demonstrating them.

 _Exhalants._—Of the cellular exhalations.—Proofs and phenomena of
 these exhalations.

 _Absorbents._—Cellular absorptions.—Proofs.—The cellular texture is
 not wholly formed of absorbents.

 _Nerves._                                                           136




 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 PROPERTIES OF THE CELLULAR SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 _Extensibility._—Examples of the different distensions.—Distinctive
 character of the cellular extensibility.—Its phenomena.—It becomes
 nothing in inflammation, chronic engorgements, &c.

 _Contractility._—Different examples of this property brought into
 action.—Its varieties according to the ages.—General remarks.       140


 II. _Vital Properties._

 The animal ones are inconsiderable.—The organic are greater, except
 sensible contractility, which however exists to a certain extent.

 _Sympathies._—It is necessary to distinguish them from the phenomena
 of juxta-position.—Various examples.—General observations.—Vital
 properties put in action by the sympathies.

 _Character of the vital properties._—The vital activity is very
 considerable in the cellular texture.—Various proofs.—Remarks upon
 the species.—Difference of vitality in the two species of cellular
 texture.                                                            143


 III. _Properties of Reproduction._

 _Influence of the cellular texture upon the formation of
 cicatrices._—Division of the periods of the cicatrices.

 _First period._—Inflammation.—How it takes place.—Its advantages.

 _Second period._—Fleshy granulations.—Experiments.—Provisional
 membrane of the cicatrices.—Its uses.—General phenomena of the
 internal cicatrices.—Cellular nature of this membrane and of the
 granulations.—Different opinions.

 _Third period._—Suppuration.—What corresponds to it in the internal
 cicatrices.—Analogy of these cicatrices with the external.

 _Fourth period._—Contraction of the fleshy
 granulations.—Adhesions.—Consequences of the preceding principles.—Of
 union by the first intention.                                       148


 _Influence of the cellular texture in the formation of
 tumours._—Cellular nature of all tumours which grow and
 increase.—Proofs.—Mode of development of these tumours.—How they
 differ from various engorgements, acute and chronic.                157

 _Influence of the cellular texture in the formation of cysts._—What
 is a cyst.—Its analogy with the serous surfaces.—Its cellular
 structure.—Mode of its development.                                 160


 ARTICLE SIXTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE CELLULAR TEXTURE.


 I. _State of the Cellular System in the First Age._

 Mucous mass represented by the cellular texture of the
 fœtus.—Superabundance of fluid.—This is then the cellular
 fluid.—Difficulty of emphysema in the fœtus.—State of the cellular
 texture in infancy and youth.—Its vital energy.—Consequences.       164

 II. _State of the Cellular System in the After Ages._

 Arrangement of the cellular texture in the adult.—Differences arising
 from sex.—Degeneracy of this texture in old age.—Withering that it
 experiences.—Consequences.                                          167


 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

 Division of the nerves into two systems.—Differences of these
 two systems.—General arrangement of that of animal life.—Its
 symmetry.—Relation of size between the nerves and the brain.        169


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 EXTERNAL FORMS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _Origin of the Cerebral Nerves._

 In what sense this origin must be understood.—It takes place, 1st, in
 the brain; 2d, in the tuber annulare and its dependancies; 3d, in the
 spinal marrow.—Manner of this triple origin.—Of the crossing of the
 nerves.—Phenomena of paralysis in regard to this.—Peculiar arrangement
 of the cerebral membranes at the origin of the nerves.—Extent,
 direction and form of the nerves at this origin.                    171


 II. _Course of the Cerebral Nerves._

 _Communications of the cerebral nerves at their exit from
 their osseous cavity._—There are none between the nerves of
 the brain properly called.—The communications begin in those
 of the tuber annulare.—They are very numerous in those of the
 spinal marrow.—Arrangement of the plexuses which result from
 them.—Consequences as it regards descriptive neurology.

 _Internal communications of the nervous cords._—Manner
 of these communications.—Internal plexus to each
 nerve.—Consequences.—Difference from anastomoses.

 _Nervous Trunks._—Their course.—Their form.—Their length, &c.

 _Nervous branches, smaller branches, ramifications, &c._—Mode of
 origin.—Length.—Course, &c.                                         176


 III. _Termination of the Nerves._

 What is to be understood by it.—Triple mode of termination.

 _Anastomoses with the same system._—What is to be understood by
 anastomoses.—They are rare in this system.—They can be referred to
 three classes.

 _Anastomoses with the system of organic life.—Termination in the
 organs._—Manner of this termination.—Division of the organs in this
 respect.                                                            182


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _Texture peculiar to this Organization._

 Arrangement of the nervous cords.—Their varieties.—Each nerve has its
 peculiar organization.—Of the structure of the nervous filaments.


 _Of the nervous coat and its origin._—How this origin may be seen.—Its
 triple arrangement at the brain, the tuber annulare and the spinal
 marrow.—Particular arrangement of the optic nerve.—Remarks upon the
 pia mater.—Course of the nervous coat.                              185

 _Action of certain substances upon the nervous coat; its resistance,
 &c._—Action of the acids, water, caloric, and the alkalies.—Resistance
 of the nervous coat.

 _Medullary substance_; its origin, arrangement and proportions.

 _Comparison between the medullary substance of the brain and the
 nerves._—Effect of desiccation upon each.—Putrefaction and its
 phenomena.—Absence of the horny hardening in both.—Action of water
 upon both.—Action of the acids, the alkalies, neutral salts and the
 digestive juices.—Difference of the nervous pulp in each part.      190


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Nervous System of Animal
 Life._

 _Cellular texture._—It is wanting in the nerves, in the cranium
 and the spine. Elsewhere it is found between their filaments and
 cords.—Cellular fat.

 _Blood vessels._—Their arrangement.—Remarks upon the veins.—Of the
 blood.—Of the nerves.—Action of this fluid upon them.

 _Exhalants and Absorbents._—Examination of the opinion upon the
 exhalation of the nervous coat.—Different observations.

 _Nerves._                                                           199


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 They are but very slightly marked.—Remarks upon the nervous
 distensions.                                                        204


 II. _Vital Properties.—Properties of Animal Life._

 _Animal sensibility inherent in the nerves._—Various experiments
 upon this sensibility.—Remarks upon that of the brain.—Phenomena
 of the experiments upon the nerves.—Character of the animal
 nervous sensibility. —Of neuralgias.—Another character of this
 sensibility.—Experiments.—Consequences.                             206

 _Influence of the nerves upon the animal sensibility of all the
 organs._—Distinction of the sensations, in this respect, into
 external and internal.—Subdivision of the external into general
 and particular.—Part which the nerves perform in each.—Internal
 sensations.—Uncertainty respecting the nervous influence
 in sensations.—Differences between animal sensibility and
 contractility.—Of the nervous atmosphere.—Uncertainty of this
 opinion.                                                           211

 _Animal contractility.—Influence of the nerves upon that of the other
 parts._—How the nerves are the agents of this property.—Different
 opinions upon the action of the nerves.—Uncertainty of these
 opinions.—General observations.

 _Properties of organic life, considered in the nerves._—They are
 slightly marked.—Increase of the size of the nerves in the affections
 of some parts.—Various experiments and observations.

 _Influence of the cerebral nerves upon the organic properties of
 the other parts._—They are foreign to these properties.—They have
 not there any known influence, 1st, upon the capillary circulation;
 2d, upon exhalation; 3d, upon secretion; 4th, upon absorption;
 5th, upon nutrition.—Different proofs of these assertions.—Remarks
 on the diseases which affect animal life and those which affect
 organic.—Uncertainty of the term _nervous influence_.               216

 _Sympathies.—Sympathies peculiar to the nerves._—Different phenomena
 of these sympathies.—Sympathies, 1st, between two nerves of the
 same pair; 2d, between two nerves of the same side; 3d, between the
 branches of the same pair; 4th, between the nerves and different
 organs.—Different examples of these sympathies.                     224

 _Influence of the nerves upon the sympathies of the other
 organs._—Different opinions upon sympathies.—Uncertainty of these
 opinions.—Division of sympathies founded upon that of the vital
 properties.—Different influence of the nerves upon each species of
 sympathy.—Cases in which it is real and those in which it is
 nothing.                                                           226


 III. _Properties of Reproduction._

 Phenomena of nervous cicatrizations.—Their analogy with other
 cicatrizations.                                                     233




 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 It is much developed.—General remarks.—Inactivity of the brain,
 notwithstanding its development.—Its softness.—Action of the
 alkalies upon this organ.—The cerebral nerves are developed in
 proportion.—Peculiar phenomenon of their development.—This phenomenon
 is opposite to that of the arteries.—Consequence which results from
 it.                                                                 235


 II. _State of the Nervous System during Growth._

 Phenomena at birth.—Influence of the red blood.—Predominance of
 the nervous system during childhood.—Consequences relative to the
 sensations, motions and various affections.                         240


 III. _State of the Nervous System after Growth._

 Phenomenon of puberty.—Phenomena of the following ages.             244


 IV. _State of the Nervous System in Old Age._

 Its action is slight.—State of the brain at this period.—Influence of
 this state upon sensibility.—Phenomena of sensation and motion in old
 age.                                                                244


 NERVOUS SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

 GENERAL REMARKS.

 How this system should be understood.—The great sympathetic does not
 exist.—Each ganglion forms an insulated system.—This system belongs to
 organic life.—It exhibits many irregularities.—The mode of describing
 it.                                                                 249




 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE GANGLIONS.

 I. _Situation, Forms, Relations, &c._

 Ganglions that are constant.—Those that are accidental.             253


 II. _Organization._

 Colour.—Difference of the texture of the ganglions from that of the
 brain.—Comparative experiments.—This texture is not fibrous.—It
 differs essentially from that of the nerves.—Its organic lesions are
 rare.—Common parts of this texture.                                 255


 III. _Properties._

 The ganglions have the organic ones.—The animal appear to be slightly
 marked in them.—Experiments.—Sympathies.—Nervous affections of the
 ganglions.—The kind of pain of this system.—General remarks.        260


 IV. _Development._

 It does not follow that of the brain.—Influence of this fact upon the
 diseases of childhood.—Another difference between the ganglions and
 the brain.                                                          263


 V. _Remarks upon the Vertebral Ganglions._

 Their arrangement.—Obscurity which they throw upon the functions of
 this system.                                                        264


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 OF THE NERVES OF ORGANIC LIFE.


 I. _Origin._

 Manner of this origin.—Method of seeing it.                         265


 II. _Course, Termination, Plexuses._

 Of the branches which go to the cerebral nerves.—Of those which go to
 the neighbouring ganglions.—Of those which go the muscles.—Of those
 which form the plexuses.—Arrangement of these last.—Of the filaments
 which go from them.—Their double arrangement upon the arteries.     267


 III. _Structure, Properties, &c._

 Analogy with the preceding nerves as to texture.—Animal sensibility
 appears to be less in them.—Experiments.—Sympathies of these
 nerves.—General remarks.                                            271


 VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 GENERAL REMARKS UPON THE CIRCULATION.


 I. _Division of the Circulation._

 _Circulation of red blood._—General organs.—Direction.

 _Circulation of black blood._—General organs.—Direction.

 _Difference of the two circulations._—Their separation is
 complete.—Opposition of the lungs to all the parts.

 _General mechanical phenomena of the two circulations._—Conical
 form of the circulatory apparatus.—There are two cones for each
 circulation.—The heart is placed at their union as a double agent of
 impulse.—Its inequality in this respect.                            275


 II. _Reflections upon the General Uses of the Circulation._

 _General uses of the circulation of the red blood._—It furnishes the
 materials of secretion, exhalation, absorption, &c.—All the great
 phenomena of the economy are derived from it.

 _General uses of the circulation of black blood._—It repairs
 the losses made by the preceding, by the substances which it
 receives.—General and opposite attributes of the two—sanguineous
 systems.                                                            282




 ARTICLE SECOND.

 SITUATION, FORMS, AND GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH
 RED BLOOD.

 Of the two portions of this system.—Of their union.—Position of the
 agent of impulse compared to the whole body.                        285


 I. _Origin of the Arteries._

 _Origin of the aorta._—Peculiar anatomical arrangement of this
 origin.                                                             287

 _Origin of the trunks, branches, smaller branches, &c._—Number of the
 arterial divisions.—Angles of origin.—Proportion of the divisions.  288


 II. _Course of the Arteries._

 _Course of the trunks and branches._—Their position, relation and
 direction.—Motions which they communicate.                          291

 _Course of the smaller branches, ramifications,
 &c._—Position.—Relations.—Curvatures.—These curvatures have no
 influence upon the motion of the blood.—Proofs.—Uses of these
 curvatures.                                                         293

 _Anastomoses of the arteries in their course._—Of the two modes
 of anastomoses.—Triple mode of those in which two equal trunks
 terminate.—Anastomoses with unequal trunks.—General remarks upon
 anastomoses.                                                        296

 _Forms of the arteries in their course._—In what direction they are
 conical.—Relation of capacities.                                    299


 III. _Termination of the Arteries._

 It takes place in the capillary system.—Its varieties according to the
 organs.                                                             300


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.


 I. _Texture peculiar to this Organization._

 Two principal membranes form it.                                    301

 _Peculiar membrane of the
 arteries._—Thickness.—Colour.—Experiments.—Varieties in the
 cerebral arteries.—Arterial fibres.—Arrangement of these fibres at
 the origin of the branches.—Their nature is not muscular.— Their
 brittleness.—Their resistance.—General consequences.                302

 _Action of different agents upon the arterial
 texture._—Desiccation.—Putrefaction.—Maceration.—Stewing.—Action of
 the acids, the alkalies, &c.                                        308

 _Membrane common to the system with red blood._—Its differences in the
 different regions.—Of the fluid which moistens it.—Its relations.—Its
 nature.—Its singular disposition to ossification.—Peculiar phenomena
 and laws of this ossification.—Pathological consequences.           311


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Vascular System with Red
 Blood._

 _Blood vessels._—Their arrangement.—They do not appear to go to the
 internal membrane.                                                  317

 _Cellular texture._—There are two species of it.—Of that which unites
 the artery to the neighbouring organs.—Of that which is peculiar
 to it, and which has a peculiar nature.—The arterial fibres are
 remarkable for having none of this texture between
 them.—Consequences.                                                 318

 _Exhalants and absorbents._—There does not appear to be absorption in
 the arteries.—Experiments.                                          321

 _Nerves._—Of the cerebral ones.—Of the organic ones.—Their
 proportion.—Their course, &c.                                       324


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 PROPERTIES OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.


 I. _Physical Properties._

 Remarkable elasticity.—Its use.—Its differences from contractility of
 texture.                                                            322


 II. _Properties of Texture._

 _Extensibility._—1st, of that in the axis; 2d, of that in the
 diameter.                                                           324

 _Contractility._—Of that in the axis.—Of that in the
 diameter.—Its differences from irritability.—Remarks upon this
 contractility.—Practical consequences.                              326




 III. _Vital Properties. Properties of Animal Life._

 _Sensibility._—Experiments upon this property.                      329

 _Contractility._—It is nothing. _ib._

 _Properties of organic life.—Sensible organic Contractility._—It is
 nothing.—Different experiments to prove it.—Mistakes concerning this
 property.                                                           330

 _Insensible organic contractility._—How its influence must
 be understood.—Vital activity is but slightly marked in the
 arteries.—General consequences.                                     332

 _Remarks upon the causes of the motion of the red blood._—These causes
 appear to be foreign to the arteries.                               335

 _Influence of the heart in the motion of red blood._—Different
 proofs of this influence.—Morbid phenomena.—Different
 experiments.—Observations.—General Consequences.                    336

 _Of the limits of the action of the heart._—They appear to be at the
 place of the change of the red blood into black.—Increasing influence
 of the arteries upon the red blood in the neighbourhood of the
 capillaries.                                                        342

 _Phenomena of the impulse of the heart._—The motion of the red blood
 is sudden and instantaneous.—Proofs.—The contraction of the arteries
 does not push the blood.—From what it arises.—The causes of delay are
 nothing.—General remarks.                                           334

 _Remarks upon the pulse._—The arterial locomotion has a great part in
 it.—Of the accessory causes.—Of the varieties of the pulse.—General
 reflections.                                                        348

 _Sympathies._—They are in general rare in the arteries.—Why.        352


 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH RED BLOOD.


 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 The two systems are then confounded.—There is but one species of
 blood.—How the fœtus can live with black blood alone.—Peculiar
 mode of circulation in the fœtus.—Consequences which result from
 it.—Insensible change of this mode of circulation.—How it takes
 place.—Great development of the arteries in the fœtus.              354




 II. _State of the Vascular System with Red Blood during Growth._

 Sudden formation of the red blood at birth.—Changes in the course of
 this fluid.—Phenomena and causes of these changes.—Predominance of the
 arteries during youth.                                              364


 III. _State of the Vascular System with Red Blood after Growth._

 Influence of the genital organs.—Varieties of the influence of the red
 blood according to the ages.                                        371


 IV. _State of the Vascular System with Red Blood during old Age._

 Diminution of the arterial ramifications.—The red blood is less
 abundant.—The arteries are condensed.—Phenomena of the pulse.—Of the
 pulse in the last moments of life.—Experiments upon this subject.   373


 V. _Accidental Development of the System with Red Blood._

 There are two kinds of it; 1st, Dilatation from an obstacle. 2d,
 Dilatation from any tumour.                                         377


 VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 SITUATION, FORMS, DIVISION AND GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE VASCULAR
 SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


 I. _Origin of the Veins._

 Manner of this origin.—Two orders of veins.                         380


 II. _Course of the Veins._

 Examination of this course on the exterior and the interior.        381

 III. _Proportion of the capacity of the two systems with Black and Red
 Blood._

 Remarks upon the varieties of venous capacity.—Parallel between
 the two vascular apparatus with red and black blood in this
 respect.—General consequences.—The velocity is in an inverse ratio of
 the capacity, &c.                                                   382

 _Ramifications, small branches, branches, angles of union, &c.—Forms
 of the Veins._—In what direction these vessels are conical.—Relations
 between the branches and their divisions.                           388

 _Anastomoses._—They are very frequent.—Why.—Communication between the
 external and the internal order.—Consequences.—Different modes of
 anastomoses.—Their necessity from the numerous obstacles to the course
 of the blood.—Of these obstacles.                                   392


 IV. _Termination of the Veins._

 Mode of termination in the heart.—Of the two venous cones, the
 superior and the inferior.—Of their communication by the azygos.    396


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


 I. _Texture peculiar to this Organization._

 _Membrane peculiar to the veins._—Manner of seeing it.—Its
 longitudinal fibres.—Varieties of these fibres.—Their nature.—Peculiar
 arrangement of the cerebral sinuses.                                399

 _Common membrane of the black blood._—Its differences from that of
 the red blood.—More extensibility.—Less thickness.—No disposition to
 ossify.—Consequences.                                               403

 _Of the valves of the veins._—Their form.—Their situation.—Veins which
 they occupy.—Their size.—Remarks upon their relations with the caliber
 of the veins.—Their variety.—Their number.                          404

 _Action of reagents upon the venous texture._—Action of the air,
 water, caloric, the acids, &c.                                      407


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Vascular System with
 Black Blood._

 _Blood vessels. Cellular texture._—Of that which unites the veins to
 the neighbouring parts.—Of that which is peculiar to them.          408


 _Exhalants and Absorbents._—Experiments upon venous absorption.

 _Nerves._—There are but very few of them.                           409


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 _Extensibility._—It is very evident.—Venous ruptures however take
 place.—Various examples.—Their causes are but obscurely known.      411

 _Contractility_—Of this property in the longitudinal and the
 transverse direction.                                               413


 II. _Vital Properties._

 _Properties of Animal Life._—Result of the experiments upon
 sensibility.—There is no contractility.                             414

 _Properties of organic life. Sensible Contractility._—It appears to be
 but slight.—General remarks.                                        415

 _Of the venous pulse._—Of its cause.—It is a reflux.—Double cause
 which produces it.                                                  416

 _Insensible Contractility._—It appears to exist.—The vital activity is
 greater in the veins than in the arteries.—Consequences.            419

 _Observations on the motion of the black blood in the veins._—There is
 no pulse analogous to that of the arteries.—Agent of impulse of the
 venous blood.—Causes of delay—Accessory causes of motion.—Resemblance
 between the motion of the veins and that of the arteries.           420

 _Sympathies_ of the veins.—They are very obscure.                   424


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.


 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 The veins are less developed in proportion than the
 arteries.—Why.—Remarks.                                             425




 II. _State of this System during Growth and afterwards._

 Various phenomena of childhood, adult age, &c.                      427


 III. _State of this System in Old Age._

 The veins are much developed in old age.—This development is only a
 dilatation.—Its varieties according to different circumstances.     428


 IV. _Accidental Development of the Veins._

 It must be considered, 1st, in tumours; 2d, in the distensions of the
 different parts.                                                    430


 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 REMARKS UPON THE PULMONARY ARTERY AND VEINS.

 Though the two kinds of blood are separate, yet the mechanical
 phenomena of their courses are analogous in the aorta and the
 pulmonary artery, and in the general and the pulmonary veins.      _ib._


 ARTICLE SIXTH.

 ABDOMINAL VASCULAR SYSTEM WITH BLACK BLOOD.

 _Situation, forms, general arrangement, anastomoses, &c._—Origin
 and termination in the capillaries.—Abdominal portion.—Hepatic
 portion.—Differences between them.                                  433

 _Organization, properties, &c._—Analogy with the veins in this
 respect.—Peculiar arrangement in the hepatic portion.—Absence of
 valves.—Why.                                                        436

 _Remarks upon the motion of the black abdominal blood._—Comparison
 between the liver and the lungs.—Their difference as it regards
 the blood that goes to them.—Mechanism of the circulation of this
 system.—Influence of the accessory causes.                          438

 _Remarks upon the liver._—It performs another function besides the
 secretion of bile.—Proofs.—We are ignorant of this function.—It
 must be extremely important.—Various proofs.—The liver exhibits
 phenomena that no other gland does.—It is not certain that the black
 abdominal blood serves for the secretion of bile.—Proofs.—General
 observations.—Experiments.                                          440

 _Remarks upon the course of the bile._—Course of this fluid during
 abstinence and during digestion.—Cystic bile.—Hepatic bile.—Reflux
 towards the stomach during vacuity and fulness.—Experiments.        446

 _Development._—There is only one vascular system in the fœtus.—It
 is divided into three at birth.—State of the umbilical vein and
 the vena porta in the fœtus.—Relative size of the liver at this
 period.—Phenomena at birth.—Different influences of this system in the
 following ages.                                                     450


 END OF CONTENTS TO VOL. I.




 VOLUME SECOND.


 CAPILLARY SYSTEMS.

 PAGE.

 There are two of them.—Their general arrangement.—Their opposition.   3


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE GENERAL CAPILLARY SYSTEM.

 General arrangement of this system.                                   4


 I. _General division of the Capillaries._

 _Of the organs in which the capillaries contain only blood._          6

 _Of the organs in which the capillaries contain blood and fluids
 differing from it._—Serous system taken for an example.—Experiments by
 injections.—Various other systems present analogous facts.—Proportion
 of the blood and the fluids differing from it. _ib._

 _Of the organs in which the capillaries do not contain blood._        8


 II. _Difference of Organs in respect to the number of their
 Capillaries._

 There are many classes of organs in this respect.—Why the capillaries
 are very much developed in some.—Consequences as it regards diseases. 9

 _Remarks upon injections._—Their insufficiency in making us acquainted
 with the small vessels.                                              10


 III. _Of the proportions which exist in the Capillaries between the
 Blood and the Fluids that differ from it._

 Continual varieties in the proportion.—Cause of these varieties.—They
 are very numerous.                                                   12


 _Different proportions of blood in the capillaries, according as the
 secretions and exhalations are active or passive._—Of active and
 passive exhalations.—Of secretions of the same nature.—Examination
 of each.—Proofs that wherever there is activity, blood enters the
 capillaries.—Opposite arrangement in the passive phenomena.          13

 _Consequences of the preceding Remarks._                             17


 IV. _Of the Anastomoses of the General Capillary System._

 Mode of these anastomoses.—The capillaries considered in relation
 to the vessels with which they communicate.—Influence of these
 communications.—Important observation in regard to the examination of
 dead bodies.—How acute inflammations disappear at death.             17


 V. _How, notwithstanding the general communication of the Capillary
 System, the Blood and the Fluids differing from it, remain separate._

 This depends on the different modifications of the organic
 sensibility.—Proofs.—General remarks.                                21


 VI. _Consequences of the preceding principles, in relation to
 Inflammation._

 Every thing arises, in this affection, from the alteration of the
 organic sensibility.—Proofs.—Varieties of intensity and nature in
 inflammations.—Terminations of inflammations.—Of putrefaction.—Of
 death.—Of induration.—Of the blood which stops in inflamed parts.    24

 _Differences of inflammation according to the different systems._—Each
 has a peculiar one.—Of those which are the most disposed to it.—It
 has peculiar modifications in each.—Same observation in regard to its
 terminations.                                                        30


 VII. _Structure and Properties of the Capillaries._

 We cannot ascertain completely the structure.—It has however
 varieties.                                                           33


 VIII. _Of the Circulation of the Capillaries._

 _Motions of the fluids in the Capillary System._—The blood is
 independent of the action of the heart in the capillaries.—Various
 proofs of this assertion.—The blood circulates by the influence
 of the forces of the part.—Varieties of the motions.—Causes of
 these varieties.—Influence of the atmosphere upon the capillary
 circulation.—Of the two kinds of bleeding in relation to the
 capillaries and to the trunks.—Circulation of other fluids than the
 blood in the capillaries.                                            34

 _Phenomena of the alteration of the fluids in the Capillary
 System._—Change of the red blood to black.—Phenomena of this change. 41


 IX. _Of the Capillaries considered as the seat of the production of
 Heat._

 Different hypotheses.—Phenomena of animal heat.—How it is
 produced.—Analogy of the production of heat with exhalation,
 secretion, &c.—Influence of the different vital forces.—Explanation
 of the phenomena of animal heat in the state of health and
 disease.—Sympathetic heat.—Sympathies of heat.—Difference between the
 two.                                                                 43


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 PULMONARY CAPILLARY SYSTEM.


 I. _Relation of the two Capillary Systems, Pulmonary and General._

 How all the blood of the general system can go through the
 pulmonary.—Difference of one from the other as it respects the course
 of this fluid.                                                       55


 II. _Remarks upon the Circulation of the Pulmonary Capillaries._

 Peculiar character of pulmonary inflammations.—Phenomena to which they
 give rise.—Of the pulmonary circulation in various other diseases.   58


 III. _Alteration of the Blood in the Pulmonary Capillaries._         63


 IV. _Remarks upon the state of the Lungs in Dead Bodies._

 Their proportions very various from engorgement.—They are hardly ever
 in the natural state.—Why.—Consequences.                             64




 EXHALANT SYSTEM.

 General Remarks upon the differences of exhalations and absorptions. 67


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE EXHALANTS.


 I. _Origin, Course and Termination._

 Different hypotheses respecting these vessels.—What observation shows
 us concerning them.                                                  69


 II. _Division of the Exhalants._

 They can be referred to three classes.—Table of these classes and
 their division.                                                      71

 III. _Difference of the Exhalations._                                73


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 PROPERTIES, FUNCTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE EXHALANT SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties._

 We are ignorant of those of texture.—The organic are very evident in
 it.                                                                  74

 _Characters of the Vital Properties._—They vary in each
 system.—Consequences as it regards functions. _ib._


 II. _Of Natural Exhalations._

 They are all derived from the vital properties.—They vary consequently
 like these properties.—Proofs.—Of sympathetic exhalations.           75




 III. _Of Preternatural Exhalations._

 _Sanguineous exhalation.—Hemorrhage of the excrementitious
 exhalants._—Hemorrhage from the skin.—Hemorrhages from the mucous
 surfaces.—They take place by exhalation.—Proofs.—Experiments.—Of
 active and passive hemorrhages.—Differences between hemorrhages by
 rupture and by exhalation, between those of the capillaries and those
 of the great vessels.                                                78

 _Hemorrhages of the recrementitious exhalants._—Hemorrhages of the
 serous surfaces.—Observations concerning dead bodies.—Cellular
 hemorrhages.—Other hemorrhages of the exhalants.                     85

 _Preternatural exhalations, not sanguineous._—Varieties of the
 exhaled fluids, according to the state of the vital forces of the
 exhalants.—Different examples of these varieties.                    87


 IV. _Of the preternatural development of the exhalants._

 It is especially in cysts that it takes place.—The secreted fluids are
 never preternaturally poured out like the exhaled.—Why.—Of the natural
 emunctories.                                                         88


 ABSORBENT SYSTEM.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE ABSORBENT VESSELS.


 I. _Origin of the Absorbents._

 Table of absorptions.—Of external absorptions.—Of internal
 absorptions.—Of the nutritive absorptions.—It is impossible to know
 the mode of origin of the absorbents.—Interlacing of the branches.  91


 II. _Course of the Absorbents._

 Their division into two layers, superficial and deep-seated.—Their
 arrangement in the extremities and the trunk.                        95


 _Forms of the absorbents in their course._—They are cylindrical, full
 of knots, &c.—Consequences of these forms.—The absorbents have not as
 great capacity during life as in the dead body.                      97

 _Of the capacity of the absorbents in their course._—Manner of
 ascertaining it.—Extreme varieties which it exhibits.—Capacity of the
 absorbents compared with that of the veins.                          99

 _Anastomoses of the absorbents in their course._—Different modes of
 these anastomoses.—Remarks upon the lymphatic circulation.          102

 _Remarks upon the difference of dropsies that are produced by the
 increase of exhalation, and those that are the effect of a diminution
 of absorption._—Cases that may be referred to one or the other
 cause.                                                              104


 III. _Termination of the Absorbents._

 Trunks of termination.—Their disproportion with the
 branches.—Consequences.—Difficulties in regard to the motion of the
 lymph.—Remarks upon venous absorption.                              105


 IV. _Structure of the Absorbents._

 Exterior texture.—Vessels.—Peculiar membrane.—Valves.—Uses of these
 last.                                                               109


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 LYMPHATIC GLANDS.


 I. _Situation, Size, Forms, &c._

 Varieties of their number and situation in the different
 regions.—Relation with the cellular texture.—Varieties from age, sex,
 &c.                                                                 111


 II. _Organization._

 _Colour._—Its varieties.—Particular arrangement about the bronchia. 114

 _Common parts._—External cellular texture.—Cellular
 membrane.—Vessels.                                                  115

 _Peculiar texture._—Density.—Cells.—Contained fluid.—Properties and
 phenomena of this texture.—Interlacing of the absorbents.           116




 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE ABSORBENT SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties of Texture._                                         118


 II. _Vital Properties._

 Animal sensibility.—Its phenomena in the vessels and the
 glands.—Organic properties.—Their duration after death.—Remarks upon
 the absorbent faculty of dead bodies.                               119

 _Characters of the vital properties._—Life is very evident in this
 system.—Its disposition to inflammation.—Character which this
 affection has in it.                                                122

 _Differences of the vital properties in the absorbent vessels and
 their glands._—These differences are remarkable.—Their influence upon
 diseases.                                                           123

 _Sympathies._—Sympathies of the glands.—Sympathies of the
 vessels.—Remarks upon the engorgements of the lymphatic glands.     124


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 OF ABSORPTION.


 I. _Influence of the Vital Forces upon this Function._

 All depends on the organic properties.                              128


 II. _Varieties of Absorption._

 Different examples.—Of resolution.—Of the absorption of morbific
 principles.                                                         129


 III. _Motion of the Fluids in the Absorbents._

 Laws of this motion.—It is not subject to any reflux.—Why.          132


 IV. _Of Absorption in the different Ages._

 It appears that the internal and external absorptions are opposite at
 the two extreme ages.—Remarks.                                      134




 V. _Preternatural Absorption._

 Absorption of certain fluids different from those naturally
 absorbed.—Absorption in the cysts.                                  138


 SYSTEMS PECULIAR TO CERTAIN APPARATUS.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

 Differences of the systems peculiar to certain apparatus, from those
 common to all.—Characters of the first.—Their distribution in the
 apparatus.                                                          139


 OSSEOUS SYSTEM.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE FORMS OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM. DIVISION OF THE BONES.


 I. _Of the Long Bones._

 Relation of their position with their general uses.—External forms of
 the body and the extremities.—Internal forms.—Medullary canal.—Its
 situation, extent and form.—Its use.—It disappears in the first
 periods of callus.—It is shorter in proportion in childhood.        144


 II. _Of the Flat Bones._

 Relations of their situation and external forms with the general use
 of forming the cavities.—Internal forms.                            147




 III. _Of the Short Bones._

 Position.—Internal and external forms.—General uses.                149


 IV. _Of the Bony Eminences._

 Their division into those, 1st, of articulation; 2d, of insertion;
 3d, of reflection; 4th, of impression.—Remarks upon each of these
 divisions.—Relations of the second with the muscular force.—How these
 last are formed.                                                    150


 V. _Of the Osseous Cavities._

 Their division into those, 1st, of insertion; 2d, of reception;
 3d, of sliding; 4th, of impression; 5th, of transmission; 6th, of
 nutrition.—Particular remarks upon each division.—Of the three kinds
 of canals of nutrition.                                             153


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture Peculiar to the Osseous System._

 Common division of this texture.

 _Texture with cells._—How it is formed.—When it is formed.—Of the
 cells and their communications.—Experiments.                        156

 _Compact texture._—Arrangement of its fibres.—Their
 formation.—Experiments to ascertain their direction.—The osseous
 layers do not exist.—Proofs.—Influence of rickets upon the compact
 texture.                                                            158

 _Arrangement of the two osseous textures in the three kinds of
 Bones._—Arrangement of the compact texture.—Two kinds of texture
 with cells in the long bones.—Proportion of the common texture with
 cells and the compact texture in the short and broad bones.—The same
 proportion examined in the cavities and the osseous eminences.      161

 _Of the composition of the osseous texture._—There are two principal
 bases.—Of the saline calcareous substance.—Experiments.—Nature
 of this substance.—Experiments to ascertain the gelatinous
 substance.—Different relations of each of these substances with
 vitality.                                                           164




 II. _Common Parts which enter into the organization of the Osseous
 System._

 Three orders of blood vessels.—Arrangement of
 each.—Experiments.—Proportions according to age.—Communication.—Proofs
 of the existence of the cellular texture.                           167


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Physical Properties._

 Elasticity.—It is in the inverse ratio of the age.                  171


 II. _Properties of Texture._

 Different examples of contractility and extensibility.—Characters of
 these properties.                                                   171


 III. _Vital Properties._

 They are obscure.                                                   173

 _Characters of these properties._—Slowness of their development.—Their
 influence upon diseases.                                            174

 _Sympathies._—Their character is always chronic.—General remark upon
 sympathies.                                                         175

 _Seat of the vital properties._—They are not seated in the calcareous
 substance.—They exist only in the gelatinous.—Experiment which proves
 it.                                                                 177


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 OF THE ARTICULATIONS OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Division of the Articulations._

 _Moveable Articulations.—Observations upon their Motions._—1st.
 Opposition; it is extensive or confined.—2d. Circumduction; a motion
 composed of all those of opposition.—3d. Rotation; a motion upon the
 axis.—4th. Sliding.                                                 180


 _Immoveable articulations._—They are on surfaces in juxta-position,
 inserted into each other or implanted.                              182

 _Table of the Articulations._                                       183


 II. _Observations upon the Moveable Articulations._

 _First genus._—Situation.—Form of the surfaces.—Rotation and
 circumduction are inversely in the humerus and the femur.—Why.      184

 _Second genus._—Form of the surfaces.—Motions.                      186

 _Third genus._—Diminution of the motions.—Direction in which they take
 place.                                                              187

 _Fourth genus._—Motions still less.                                 189

 _Fifth genus._—Remarkable obscurity of the motions.                 190


 III. _Observations upon the Immoveable Articulations._

 Situation, forms of each order.—Relation of the structure to the
 uses.                                                               191


 IV. _Of the means of Union between the Articular Surfaces._

 _Union of the immoveable Articulations._—Cartilages of union.       193

 _Union of moveable articulations._—Ligaments and muscles considered as
 articular bands.                                                    194


 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE OSSEOUS SYSTEM.

 Remarks.                                                            195


 I. _State of the Osseous System during Growth._

 _Mucous State._—What should be understood by it.                    195

 _Cartilaginous State._—Period and mode of its development.—Of this
 state in the broad bones.                                           197

 _Osseous State._—Its phenomena.—Its period.                         198

 _Progress of the osseous state in the long bones_; 1st, in the middle;
 2d, in the extremities.                                             200

 _Progress of the osseous state in the broad bones._—Varieties
 according to the bones.—Formation of the ossa wormiana. _ib._

 _Progress of the osseous state in the short bones._                 202




 II. _State of the Osseous System after its Growth._

 Increase in thickness.—Composition and decomposition after the
 termination of growth in thickness.—Experiments.—State of the bones in
 old age.                                                            203


 III. _Peculiar Phenomena of the Development of the Callus._

 1st. Fleshy granulations.—2d. Adhesions of these granulations.—3d.
 Exhalation of gelatine and then of phosphate of lime.               206


 IV. _Peculiar Phenomena of the Development of the Teeth._

 _Organization of the teeth.—Hard portion of the
 teeth._—Enamel.—Experiment which distinguishes it from bone.—Its
 thickness.—Its nature.—Reflections upon its organization.—Osseous
 portion.—Its form.—Cavity of the tooth.                             209

 _Soft portion of the tooth._—Its spongy nature.—Its acute
 sensibility.—Remarks upon its different sympathies.                 211

 _First dentition considered before cutting._—Follicle.—Membrane of
 this follicle analogous to the serous membranes.—Albuminous nature
 of the fluid which lubricates it.—Mode of development of the osseous
 tooth upon the follicle.—Number of the first teeth.                 213

 _First dentition considered at the period of cutting._—Mode of
 cutting.—Accidents.—Their causes.                                   216

 _Second dentition considered before cutting._—Formation of the second
 follicle.                                                           217

 _Second dentition considered at the period of cutting._—Fall of the
 first teeth.—Appearance of the second.

 _Phenomena subsequent to the cutting of the second teeth._—Growth in
 length and thickness.—Fall of the teeth earlier than the death of the
 bones.—Why.—State of the jaws after the fall of the teeth.          219


 V. _Particular Phenomena of the Development of the Sesamoid Bones._

 _General arrangement of the sesamoid bones._—Situation.—Forms.      221

 _Fibro-cartilaginous state.—Osseous state._—Phenomena of the
 patella.—Use of the sesamoid bones.                                 222




 MEDULLARY SYSTEM.

 Division of this system.                                            225


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 MEDULLARY SYSTEM OF THE FLAT AND SHORT BONES, AND THE EXTREMITIES OF
 THE LONG ONES.


 I. _Origin and Conformation._

 It is an expansion of the vessels of the second order.              225


 II. _Organization._

 There is no medullary membrane.—Vascular interlacing.               226


 III. _Properties._

 There are only organic ones.—Experiments.                           227


 IV. _Development._

 There is no medullary oil in infancy.—Proofs.—Experiments.          227


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 MEDULLARY SYSTEM OF THE MIDDLE OF THE LONG BONES.


 I. _Conformation._

 It is like the cellular.                                            229


 II. _Organization._

 The medullary membrane is not an expansion of the periosteum.—Its
 vessels.                                                            230


 III. _Properties._

 Properties of texture.—Vital properties.—Animal sensibility.—Vitality
 more active than in the bones.                                      231




 IV. _Development._

 How the medullary membrane is formed.—The marrow of the infant is
 wholly different from that of the adult.—Proofs.                    233

 _Functions._—The marrow is exhaled.—Its alterations.—Its relations
 with the nutrition of the bone.—Necrosis.—The marrow is foreign to the
 synovia.                                                            234


 CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

 What must be understood by cartilage.                               237


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE FORMS OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Forms of the Cartilages of the Moveable Articulations._

 Internal and external surfaces.—Relations of the two corresponding
 cartilages.—Peculiar characters of these cartilages in each kind of
 moveable articulations.                                             238


 II. _Forms of the Cartilages of the Immoveable Articulations._      241


 III. _Forms of the Cartilages of the Cavities._                     242


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture peculiar to the Cartilaginous System._

 Fibres.—Remarkable resistance of the cartilaginous texture to
 putrefaction, maceration, &c.—Stewing and desiccation of this
 texture.—Its various alterations.                                   243




 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Cartilaginous Texture._

 Cellular texture.—Means of seeing it.—Absence of blood vessels.—White
 vessels.—Their colour in jaundice.                                  245


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Physical Properties._

 Elasticity.—It appears to be owing to the superabundance of
 gelatine.—Proofs.                                                   247


 II. _Properties of Texture._

 They are very obscure.                                              248


 III. _Vital Properties._

 They are inconsiderable, as well as the sympathies.                 249

 _Character of the Vital Properties._—All the phenomena over which they
 preside have a chronic progress.—General observations upon the reunion
 of the parts.                                                       250


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _State of the Cartilaginous System in the First Age._

 Predominance of gelatine in the early periods.—Property which the
 cartilages then have of becoming red by maceration.—Vascular layers
 between the cartilage and the bone.—Cause which limits ossification in
 the cartilage.—Development of the cartilages of the cavities.       252


 II. _State of the Cartilaginous System in the after Ages._

 Different character which the gelatine assumes.—Ossification of the
 cartilages in old age.—Those of the cavities are the soonest
 ossified.                                                           255


 III. _Preternatural Development of the Cartilaginous System._

 Tendency of the membrane of the spleen to become the seat of
 it.—Preternatural cartilages of the articulations.                  257


 FIBROUS SYSTEM.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE FORMS AND DIVISIONS OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.

 The fibrous forms are either membranous or in fasciæ.               259


 I. _Of the Fibrous Organs of a Membranous Form._

 Fibrous membranes.—Fibrous capsules.—Fibrous sheaths.—Aponeuroses.   260


 II. _Of the Fibrous Organs in the form of Fasciæ._

 1st. Tendons.—2d. Ligaments.                                        262


 III. _Table of the Fibrous System._

 Analogy of the different organs of this system.—The periosteum is the
 common centre of these organs.                                      262


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Of the Texture peculiar to the Organization of the Fibrous System._

 Peculiar nature of the fibrous texture.—Its extreme
 resistance.—Phenomena of this resistance.—It can be
 overcome.—Difference of the fibrous and muscular textures.—Experiments
 upon the fibrous texture subjected to maceration, ebullition,
 putrefaction, the action of the acids, the digestive juices, &c.    264


 II. _Of the Common Parts which enter into the Organization of the
 Fibrous System._

 Cellular texture.—Blood vessels.—Their varieties according to the
 organs.                                                             270


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Physical Properties._


 II. _Properties of Texture._

 Extensibility.—Peculiar law to which it is subjected there.
 Contractility.—It is almost nothing.—When it is manifested.         272


 III. _Vital Properties._

 Animal sensibility.—Singular mode of putting it in action by
 distension.—Consequence of this peculiar phenomenon to the fibrous
 texture.                                                            274

 _Character of the vital properties._—The vital activity is more
 evident in this system than in the preceding.—It appears that the
 fibrous texture does not suppurate.                                 277

 _Sympathies._—Examples of those of the animal and the organic
 properties.                                                         279


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIBROUS SYSTEM.


 I. _State of the Fibrous System in the First Age._

 The fibres are wanting in most of the fibrous organs of the
 fœtus.—Softness of these organs at this age.—Varieties of
 development.—Remarks upon rheumatism.                               281




 II. _State of the Fibrous System in the After Ages._

 Phenomena of the adult.—General stiffness in old age.               283


 III. _Preternatural Development of the Fibrous System._ Various
 tumours exhibit fibres analogous to those of this system.           284


 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 OF THE FIBROUS MEMBRANES IN GENERAL.


 I. _Forms of the Fibrous Membranes._

 Their double surface.—These membranes are like moulds of their
 respective organs.—Researches respecting that of the corpus
 cavernosum.—Experiments which show that it differs essentially from
 the subjacent spongy texture.—Other researches upon that of the
 testicle.                                                           285


 II. _Organization of the Fibrous Membranes._                        288


 III. _Of the Periosteum. Of its Form._

 Its two surfaces.—Their adhesion to the bones.                      289

 _Organization of the periosteum._—Preternatural development of its
 fibres in elephantiasis.—Its connexions with the fibrous bodies in
 infancy.                                                            291

 _Development of the periosteum._

 _Functions of the Periosteum._—In what way it assists ossification.—It
 relates as much to the fibrous organs as to the bones.              292


 IV. _Perichondrium._

 Experiments upon this membrane.                                     294


 ARTICLE SIXTH.

 OF THE FIBROUS CAPSULES.


 I. _Forms of the Fibrous Capsules._

 They are very few.—Arrangement of the two principal ones.—Canal
 between them and the synovial capsule.                              295


 II. _Functions of the Fibrous Capsules._                            296




 ARTICLE SEVENTH.

 OF THE FIBROUS SHEATHS.

 Their division.                                                     297


 I. _Partial Fibrous Sheaths._

 Their form.—Their arrangement.—Why the flexor tendons are alone
 provided with them.                                                 297


 II. _General Fibrous Sheaths._                                      299


 ARTICLE EIGHTH.

 OF THE APONEUROSES.


 I. _Of the Aponeuroses for Covering._

 Their division.                                                     299

 _Aponeuroses for general covering._                                 300

 _Forms._—They are accommodated to the extremities, &c. _ib._

 _Tensor muscles.—Organization._—Examples of the tensor muscles.—Their
 uses relative to the aponeuroses.—Analogy with the tendons and
 difference from them.—Arrangement of the fibres.                    301

 _Functions._                                                        302

 _Aponeuroses for partial covering._—Examples.—General uses of these
 aponeuroses.                                                        303


 II. _Of the Aponeuroses of Insertion._

 _Aponeuroses of insertion with a broad surface._—Their
 origin.—Their uses.—The identity of their nature with that of the
 tendons.—Experiments.                                               304

 _Aponeuroses of insertion in the form of an arch._—They are rare.—They
 exist where vessels pass through.—They do not compress them.        305

 _Aponeuroses of insertion with separate fibres._                    306




 ARTICLE NINTH.

 OF THE TENDONS.


 I. _Form of the Tendons._

 Relation of the uses with the forms.—Union with the fleshy fibres.   307


 II. _Organization of the Tendons._

 Method of seeing their fibres advantageously.—They appear to be
 destitute of blood vessels.—Their tendency to be penetrated with the
 phosphate of lime.                                                  309


 ARTICLE TENTH.

 OF THE LIGAMENTS.


 I. _Ligaments with, Regular Fasciæ._

 General arrangement.                                                311


 II. _Ligaments with Irregular Fasciæ._                              312


 FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

 Organs which compose it.                                            315


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE FORMS OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.

 Division into three classes of the organs of this system.—Characters
 of each class.                                                      315




 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization of the Fibro-Cartilaginous
 System._

 It arises, 1st, from a fibrous substance; 2d, from a cartilaginous
 one.—It owes its resistance to the first and its elasticity to the
 second.—Action of caloric, air and water upon the fibro-cartilaginous
 texture.—It reddens by maceration.—Absence of the perichondrium upon
 most of the fibro-cartilages.                                       317


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Fibro-Cartilaginous
 System._                                                            320


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Physical Properties._

 Elasticity and suppleness united.                                   320


 II. _Properties of Texture._

 Extensibility.—It is quite evident in it.—Contractility.—Difference
 from elasticity.                                                    321


 III. _Vital Properties._

 They are inconsiderable.—Influence of the obscurity of these forces
 upon the properties of the fibro-cartilages.                        322


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIBRO-CARTILAGINOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _State of this System in the First Age._

 Mode of development of the three classes.                           323




 II. _State of this System in the after Ages._

 General rigidity of these organs.—Consequences.—Ossification of the
 fibro-cartilages rare.                                              325


 MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

 Difference between the muscles of the two lives.—Observations upon
 those of animal life.                                               327


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE FORMS OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.

 Division of these muscles into long, broad and short.               327


 I. _Forms of the Long Muscles._

 Place which they occupy.—Their division.—Their separation and
 reunion.—Peculiar forms of the long muscles of the spine.           328


 II. _Forms of the Broad Muscles._

 Where they are situated.—Thickness.—Peculiar forms of the broad
 pectoral muscles.                                                   330


 III. _Forms of the Short Muscles._

 Where they are found.—Their arrangement.—Remarks upon the three
 species of muscles.                                                 331


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _Texture peculiar to this Organization._

 Arrangement of this texture into fasciculi.—Its division into
 fibres.—Length of the fleshy fibres compared with that of the
 muscle.—Their direction.—Their figure.—Their softness.—Ease of their
 rupture in the dead body.—Difficulty in the living.                 332

 _Composition of the muscular texture._—Action of the air in
 desiccation and putrefaction.—Action of cold water.—Maceration and its
 products.—Ease with which the colouring substance is removed.—Analogy
 of the remaining texture with the fibrin of the blood.—Relation
 of the forces with this texture.—Action of boiling water.—Some
 peculiar phenomena of common boiled flesh.—Roasting of the fleshy
 texture.—Singular affinity of the digestive juices to this sort of
 texture.—General observations.—Influence of sex and the genital organs
 upon the fleshy texture.                                            336


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of this System._

 _Cellular texture._—Manner in which it envelops the fibres.—Its uses
 for muscular motion.—Experiment.—Fatty muscles.                     343

 _Blood vessels._—Arteries.—Of the blood of the muscles.—Of
 their colour.—Free and combined state of the colouring
 substance.—Veins.—Remarks upon the injection of them.               346

 _Nerves._—There are hardly any but those of animal life.—Their
 difference in the extensors and the flexors.—Manner in which the
 nerves penetrate the muscles.                                       348


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _Properties of Texture. Extensibility._

 This property is continually in action.—It is in proportion to the
 length of the fibres.—Its exercise in diseases.                     350

 _Contractility of texture._—Phenomena of the antagonists.—Distinction
 in these phenomena of that which belongs to the vital properties
 from that which belongs to those of texture.—Of the contractility of
 texture in diseases.—Extent and quickness of the contractions.—They
 continue after death.—Essential differences between the contractility
 of texture and horny hardening. Their parallel.                     352




 II. _Vital Properties._

 _Properties of animal life.—Sensibility._—Most of the ordinary agents
 do not develop it.—It is put into action by repeated contractions.—Of
 the sensation of lassitude.—Sensibility of the muscles in their
 affections.                                                         359

 _Animal Contractility._—It should be considered in three relations. 361

 _Animal contractility considered in the brain._—The principle of this
 property exists in this organ.—Proofs drawn from observation.—Proofs
 derived from diseases.—Proofs borrowed from experiments upon
 animals.—Cases in which the brain is foreign to the muscles.        362

 _Animal contractility considered in the nerves._—Influence
 of the spinal marrow upon this property.—Observations and
 experiments.—Influence of the nerves.—Observations and
 experiments.—All the nerves do not transmit equally the different
 irradiations of the brain.—Direction of the propagation of the nervous
 influence.                                                          367

 _Animal contractility considered in the muscles._—Necessary conditions
 in the muscle for it to contract.—Obstacles to contraction.—Various
 experiments.                                                        374

 _Causes which bring into action animal contractility._—Division
 of these causes.—Of the will.—Of the involuntary causes.—Direct
 excitement.—Sympathetic excitement.—Influence of the passions.—Remarks
 upon the motion of the fœtus.                                       374

 _Duration of the animal contractility after death._—Various
 experiments.—Consequences relative to respiration.—Variety of the
 duration of this property.—How it is extinguished.                  379

 _Organic Properties._—Organic sensibility and insensible organic
 contractility.—Sensible organic contractility.—Various experiments
 upon this last property.—Phenomena of irritations.—In order to study
 this contractility the animal contractility must be destroyed.—How
 this is done.—Various modes of contraction.                         382

 _Sympathies._—The animal sensibility is the property especially
 brought into action by them.—General Remarks.—Sympathies of animal
 sensibility.—The organic properties are rarely brought into action. 386

 _Characters of the vital properties._—Different remarks upon these
 characters.                                                         388




 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 PHENOMENA OF THE ACTION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _Force of the Muscular Contraction._

 Difference according as it is put into action by stimuli or by the
 cerebral influence.—Experiments.—Influence of muscular organization
 upon contraction.—The laws of nature the reverse of those of mechanics
 in the production of motions.—Multiplication of forces.—Uncertainty of
 calculations upon this point.                                       390


 II. _Quickness of the Contractions._

 Varieties according as the contractions are, 1st, from stimuli; 2d,
 from nervous action.—Different degrees of quickness in different
 individuals.—Influence of habit upon this degree.                   395


 III. _Duration of the Contractions._                                397


 IV. _State of the Muscles in Contraction._

 Different phenomena which they then experience.—Essential remark upon
 the different modes of contraction.                                 398


 V. _Motions imparted by the Muscles._

 _Simple Motions._—1st. In the muscles with a straight direction.—How
 we determine the uses of these muscles.—2d. In the muscles with a
 reflected direction.—3d. In those with a circular direction.        400

 _Compound Motions._—Almost every motion is compound.—How.—Different
 examples of compound motions.—Antagonist muscles.                   403


 VI. _Phenomena of the Relaxation of the Muscles._

 They are opposite to the preceding.                                 406




 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ANIMAL LIFE.


 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 It contains but little blood.—Slight contractility at this
 age.—Influence upon these phenomena, of the blood which then
 penetrates the muscles.—These organs are then slender and weak.     407


 II. _State of this System during Growth._

 Sudden effect of the red blood which penetrates the muscles, and of
 the other irritations which are connected with it.—Colour of the
 Muscles.—Period of the brightest colour.—Varieties of the action of
 reagents on the fleshy texture of young animals.                    410


 III. _State of this System after Growth._

 The thickness constantly increases.—The external forms are more
 evident.—Colour in the adult.—Innumerable variety.                  413


 IV. _State of this System in Old Age._

 Increase of density.—Diminution of cohesion.—Phenomena of the
 vacillation of the muscles.—Atrophous muscles.                      416


 V. _State of the System at Death._

 Relaxation or stiffness of the muscles.                             419


 END OF CONTENTS TO VOL. II.




 VOLUME THIRD.

 MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 FORMS OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

 PAGE

 Curved direction of the fibres.—They do not arise from the fibrous
 system.—Varieties of the muscular forms, according to the organs.     4


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.

 General difference of organization from the preceding muscles.        5


 I. _Peculiar Texture._

 General arrangement of the muscular fibre.—Analogy with the preceding
 and difference.                                                       6


 II. _Common Parts._

 Cellular Texture.—Blood vessels.—Nerves of the ganglions and of the
 brain.—Proportion of each class.                                      8




 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 _Extensibility._—Particular character of this property in the organic
 muscles.—In aneurisms of the heart and in pregnancy, it is not the
 extensibility that is brought into action.—Remarks upon this
 subject.                                                             10

 _Contractility._—It is in proportion to extensibility.—The substances
 contained in the hollow muscles are their antagonists.—Remarks.      14


 II. _Vital Properties._

 _Sensibility._—Of the lassitude of the organic muscles.—Remarks upon
 hunger.                                                              15

 _Animal Contractility._—It is nothing in these muscles.—Different,
 experiments.—Observations.—Of the muscles in part voluntary and
 in part organic.—Experiments.—Remarks upon the bladder, rectum,
 &c.—Absence of the nervous influence upon the organic muscles.       17

 _Organic Properties._—General Remarks.                               24

 _Of sensible organic contractility considered under the relation of
 the stimuli._                                                        25

 _Natural stimuli._—Different observations.—Remarks upon the fluids and
 solids.—Influence of the quality and quantity of the fluids upon the
 hollow muscles. _ib._

 _Artificial stimuli._—Action of these stimuli.—Different modes of
 action.—Limits of the horny hardening and vital contraction.         28

 _Of sensible organic contractility, considered in relation to the
 organs._                                                             31

 _First variety. Diversity of the muscular texture._—Each muscle is
 particularly in relation with some determinate substance.—Application
 of this principle to the natural and foreign fluids. _ib._

 _Second variety. Age._—Vivacity of the contractility in
 infancy.—Consequences.—Opposite phenomenon in old age.               33

 _Third Variety. Temperament._—Difference of individuals in regard to
 organic muscular force.—This force is not always in relation to the
 animal muscular force.—It cannot be increased like it by habit.      34

 _Fourth Variety. Sex._                                               35

 _Fifth Variety. Season and climate._                                 36

 _Sensible organic contractility considered in relation to the
 action of stimulants upon the organs._—The constant existence of an
 intermediate organ for this action.—Nature of this intermediate organ.
 _ib._

 _Sensible organic contractility considered in relation to its duration
 after death._—Difference of this duration according to the kind of
 death.—Remarks.                                                      38

 _Sympathies._—Sympathies of the heart.—Sympathies of
 the stomach.—Remarks upon bilious vomitings.—General
 observations.—Sympathies of the intestines, the bladder, &c.         40

 _Character of the vital properties._—Vital energy very considerable in
 this system.—Its affections act upon its predominant vital force.—The
 infrequency of the affections which suppose a derangement of the
 organic properties.                                                  44


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 PHENOMENA OF THE ACTION OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.


 I. _Force of Contractions._

 Difference from the force of contraction of the preceding system.—It
 is greater in the vital phenomena than in experiments.—Inaccuracy of
 calculations.                                                        46


 II. _Quickness of the Contractions._

 In experiments.—During life.—Comparison with the quickness of the
 preceding muscles.                                                   49


 III. _Duration of the Contractions._                                 50


 IV. _State of the Muscles in Contraction._

 Difference in this respect between the heart and the gastric muscles.
 _ib._


 V. _Motions imparted by the Organic Muscles._                        51


 VI. _Phenomena of the Relaxation of the Organic Muscles._

 Differences of this relaxation from the active dilatation of the
 muscles.—Proofs of the phenomena of this dilatation.                 52




 ARTICLE FIFTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF ORGANIC LIFE.


 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 Predominance of the heart.—State of the other muscles.—Weakness of the
 organic contractility at this age.                                   55


 II. _State of the Organic Muscular System during Growth._

 General increase of action at birth.—Of the growth in thickness and of
 that in length.—Their differences.                                   58


 III. _State of the Organic Muscular System after Growth._            61


 IV. _State of the Organic Muscular System in Old Age._

 This system outlives, if we may so say, the preceding.—Phenomenon
 resulting from its weakness.                                         62


 MUCOUS SYSTEM.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE DIVISIONS AND FORMS OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Of the two general Mucous Membranes, the Gastro-pulmonary and the
 Genito-urinary._

 Difference of these two membranes.—Their relation.                   66


 II. _Adhering Surface of the Mucous Membranes._

 Its relations.—It is everywhere subjacent to the muscles.—Sub-mucous
 texture.—Experiments.                                                69


 III. _Free surface of the Mucous Membranes._

 Of the folds it exhibits.—1st. Of those which comprehend all the
 membranes.—2d. Of those which are permanent upon the mucous
 surface.—3d. Of those which are owing to a state of vacuity of the
 hollow organs.—Different experiments.—The extent of the mucous
 surfaces is always nearly the same, whatever may be the state of their
 organs.—Relation of their free surface with external bodies.—Their
 sensibility is accommodated to this relation.—The term _foreign body_
 is merely comparative.                                               70


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture peculiar to this Organization._

 What it presents for consideration.

 _Mucous Corion._—Its variable thickness.—Mucous nature of the
 membrane of the ear.—Pathological consequences.—Softness of the
 mucous texture.—Action of the air, water, caloric, the acids and the
 digestive juices upon the mucous texture.                            76

 _Mucous papillæ._—Their varieties of form.—Their nervous
 nature.—Proofs of this nervous nature.—Their influence upon the
 sensibility of the mucous organs.                                    83


 II. _Common Parts._

 _Of the mucous glands and the fluids which they
 secrete._—Situation.—Forms.—Size.—Texture.                           86

 _Mucous fluids._—Physical properties.—Action of different agents upon
 them.—Their functions.—Parts in which they are most abundant and
 those in which they are less so.—Susceptibility of being increased
 by any irritation made upon their excretories.—Consequences.—Remarks
 upon the excitement of the mucous surfaces in diseases.—Uses of the
 mucous membranes in relation to the habitual evacuation of their
 fluids.—General remarks upon the secreted fluids.—Singular sensation
 arising from the continuance of the mucous fluids upon their
 respective surfaces.                                                 88

 _Blood vessels._—Their varieties of proportion.—Their superficial
 position.—Consequence.—Redness of the mucous system.—It often loses
 it.—Experiments upon the state of the mucous vessels in the fulness
 and vacuity of their hollow organs.—Other experiments upon the
 influence of the gases upon the colour of the mucous system.—Causes of
 its redness.—Colouring substance combined and free.                  96

 _Exhalants._—Is there exhalation upon the mucous system?—Pulmonary
 exhalation.—A great part of the pulmonary perspiration arises from the
 solution of the mucous juices.—Other mucous
 exhalations.—Hemorrhages.                                           105

 _Absorbents._—Proofs of the mucous absorption.—Irregularity of this
 absorption.—Cause of this irregularity.                             107

 _Nerves._—Those of the brain.—Those of the ganglions.—Their respective
 distribution upon this system.                                      108


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 They are less than they at first seem to be.—They are however
 real.—Their variety.—The mucous ducts are not obliterated by the
 contractility of texture when they are empty.                       109


 II. _Vital properties._

 _Properties of animal life._—Acute sensibility of the mucous
 system.—Influence of habit upon this property.—Consequences of this
 remark.—Mucous sensibility in inflammations.                        111

 _Properties of organic life._—Organic sensibility and insensible
 contractility are very evident here.—Why.—Consequences as it respects
 diseases.—Varieties of these properties.-Species of sensible organic
 contractility in the mucous texture.                                114

 _Sympathies._—How we shall divide them.                             117

 _Active Sympathies._—Example of these sympathies for each vital
 property.                                                           118

 _Passive Sympathies._—The predominant ones are those of insensible
 organic contractility.—Why.                                         120

 _Character of the vital properties._—Vital activity of this
 system.—Its varieties.—Consequences as it regards diseases.—Remarks
 upon the stomachic sympathies.                                      123




 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE MUCOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _State of the Mucous System in the First Age._

 It follows the state of the organs to which it belongs.—Delicacy of
 the papillæ.—The mucous redness is then deeper.—Sudden change at
 birth.—Why.—Phenomenon of puberty.                                  125


 II. _State of the Mucous System in the After Ages._

 Its phenomena in the adult.—Its phenomena in old age.               129


 SEROUS SYSTEM.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE EXTENT, FORMS AND FLUIDS OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.

 General arrangement of its membranes.—Of the serous surface considered
 in general.—Every serous membrane is a sac without an opening.      131


 I. _Free Surface of the Serous Membranes._

 It is smooth and polished.—This attribute is foreign to
 compression.—This surface insulates the organs to which the
 serous surfaces belong.—Its influence upon the motion of these
 organs.—Adhesions of the serous surfaces.—Their division.           134


 II. _Adhering Surface of the Serous System._

 Means of union.—The serous membranes often change relations with their
 organs.—This is owing to the laxity of the adhesions.—Adhesions more
 close.                                                              140




 III. _Serous Fluids._

 Their quantity.—Varieties of this quantity.—Experiments.—Morbid
 varieties.—Nature of these fluids.                                  142


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.

 The serous membranes have but one layer.—Its colour.—Its thickness. 144


 I. _Cellular nature of the Serous Texture._

 Proofs of this cellular nature.—Experiments by maceration, ebullition,
 desiccation, stewing and putrefaction.—Differences between the
 cellular and serous textures.                                       145

 II. _Parts common to the organization of the Serous System._

 _Exhalants._—Various proofs of serous exhalation.                   149

 _Absorbents._—Proofs of serous absorption.—Experiments.—Mode of origin
 of the absorbents.                                                  150

 _Blood vessels._—The serous membranes have but very few of them.—Those
 which are subjacent do not belong to them.—Proofs.                  151


 III. _Varieties of Organization of the Serous System._

 Different examples of these varieties.—Consequences in regard to
 diseases.—Remarks upon the pericardium.—Common characters.          153


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 _Extensibility._—It is less than it at first seems to be.—Why.—Use of
 the folds of the serous membranes.—Of their displacement.—Pain from
 these displacements in inflammation.                                155

 _Contractility._—Less than it appears to be.—It is however real.    156


 II. _Vital Properties._

 They enjoy but little animal sensibility.—Why.—Experiments.—The
 organic properties are very sensible.—Consequences.                 157

 _Sympathies._—Various examples.—Remarks upon sympathetic
 exhalations.—Remark upon the serum of dead bodies.                  158


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEROUS SYSTEM.


 I. _State of this System in the First Age._

 Extreme tenuity of the surfaces.—Quantity of the
 fluids.—Quality.—Changes at birth.—Experiments.                     161


 II. _State of the Serous System in the After Ages._

 The serous surfaces obey the laws of their respective
 organs.—Increased density in old age.—Ossification rare.            162


 III. _Preternatural Development of the Serous System._

 Various observations.                                               164


 SYNOVIAL SYSTEM.

 Points of resemblance between this system and the preceding.—Its
 division.                                                           165




 ARTICLE FIRST.

 ARTICULAR SYNOVIAL SYSTEM.


 I. _How the Synovia is separated from the mass of blood._

 There are three ways in which fluids may be separated from the blood.

 _Is the Synovia transmitted by secretion to the articular
 surfaces?_—Negative proofs.—Of the pretended synovial
 glands.—Experiments.

 _Is the Synovia transmitted by transudation to the articular
 surfaces_?—Negative proofs.—Another opinion.

 _Is the Synovia transmitted by exhalation to the articular
 surfaces?_—Positive proofs.—Analogy between the exhaled fluids and the
 synovia.—Consequences.                                              167


 II. _Remarks upon the Synovia._

 Its quantity.—It varies a little.—Rare alterations of this fluid.—Its
 difference from the serous fluids.                                  173


 III. _Of the Synovial Membranes._

 _Forms._—They represent sacs without an opening.—Difference from the
 fibrous capsules.—These capsules are wanting in the greatest number of
 articulations.—Experiments.—Proofs of the synovial membrane where it
 adheres.                                                            175

 _Organization._—Analogy with the serous surfaces.—Structure of the
 pretended synovial glands.                                          180

 _Properties._—Properties of texture.—Vital
 properties.—Experiments.—The synovial system is foreign to most
 diseases.                                                           182

 _Functions._—They are foreign to the solidity of the
 articulation.—They have relation only to the synovia.               183

 _Natural Development._—State of the synovial membrane in infancy,
 adult and old age.                                                  184

 _Preternatural Development._—Remarks upon this development.         185


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 SYNOVIAL SYSTEM OF THE TENDONS.

 It is often confounded with the preceding.                          186

 _Forms; relations; synovial fluid._—Forms of sacs without
 an opening.—Varieties of these forms.—Smooth and adhering
 surface.—Relation with the tendon.—Preternatural increase of the
 fluid.                                                              186

 _Organization, properties, development._—Their phenomena are analogous
 to those of the preceding system.—Remarks upon the affections of this
 kind of synovial membranes.                                         189


 GLANDULAR SYSTEM.

 General observations.—What a gland is.                              193


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 SITUATION, FORMS, DIVISION, &C. OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.

 Sub-cutaneous and deep position.—Relation of the position of
 the glands with their excretion.—Varieties of the glandular
 forms.—Distinction of these varieties.—External surface of the
 glands.                                                             194


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization of this System._

 The fibrous arrangement is foreign to the glands.—There is but little
 resistance in the glandular texture.—Triple arrangement of this
 texture.—Uncertainty of the researches upon its nature.—Different
 experiments upon this texture.—Desiccation.—Peculiar effect of
 stewing.—Roasting.—Maceration.—Action of the acids, gastric
 juice, &c.                                                          198

 _Of the excretories, their origin, divisions, &c. of the glandular
 reservoirs._—Origin.—Course.—Division of the glands into three
 classes, in regard to the termination of their excretories.—Of the
 reservoirs.—What supplies their place when they are wanting.—Motion of
 the fluids in the excretories.                                      204

 _Size, direction and termination of the excretories._—All the
 excretories open upon the mucous or cutaneous systems.—Observations
 upon the intestinal canal.                                          206

 _Remarks upon the secreted fluids._—They can re-enter the
 circulation.—Various experiments on this subject.—Consequences.     208

 _Structure of the excretories._—Internal membrane.—External
 texture.                                                            213


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Glandular System._

 _Cellular Texture._—Division of the glands into two classes, in regard
 to this texture.—Serum and fat of this texture.—Fatty livers.       214

 _Blood vessels._—Different ways in which they enter the glands,
 according as they are or are not surrounded with membranes.—Course
 of the arteries in the glands.—Veins.—They pour their blood into the
 general black blood.—Reflux from the heart to the glands.           216

 _Of the blood of the glands._—Division of the glands into three
 classes, as it regards the fluid which penetrates them.—Great quantity
 of blood contained in the liver and the kidney.—Variety as it respects
 secretion.                                                          219

 _Nerves._—Of those of the ganglions and of the cerebral ones.—Their
 proportion.—How they enter the glands.—Secretion is independent of
 nervous influence.                                                  221

 _Exhalants and absorbents._                                         223


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 They are inconsiderable.—Proofs.—New remarks upon the reflux of the
 black blood in the glands.                                          224


 II. _Vital Properties._

 _Properties of animal life._—Experiments upon animal
 sensibility.—Varieties of the results.                              226


 _Properties of organic life._—The insensible contractility and the
 corresponding sensibility are the predominant ones.—Their influence
 upon secretion.—Varieties of the secreted fluids.—Organic affections
 of the glands.—Remarks.                                             227

 _Sympathies._                                                       230

 _Passive sympathies._—Various examples.—Sympathies the causes of which
 act at the extremity of the excretories.—Influence of the passive
 sympathies of the glands in diseases.—Remark upon that of each gland.

 _Active Sympathies._—Various remarks.

 _Characters of the vital properties._                               235

 _First character.—Life peculiar to each gland._—Proofs of this
 peculiar life.—Of its influence in a state of health and disease.

 _Second character.—Remission of the glandular life._—The glands have a
 species of sleep.—Various examples.                                 238

 _Third character.—The glandular life is never simultaneously raised
 in the whole system._—Application of this remark to the digestive
 order.—Advantage of the artificial excitement of the glands in
 diseases.                                                           239

 _Fourth character.—Influence of climate and season upon the glandular
 life._—The sweat and many secreted fluids are opposite to each other
 in this respect.                                                    241

 _Fifth character.—Influence of sex upon the glandular life._        242


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE GLANDULAR SYSTEM.


 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 The glands are very conspicuous at this age.—Yet the secretions are
 not great.                                                          243


 II. _State of this System during Growth._

 Suddenly increased activity at birth.—Yet it is not the glandular
 system which predominates in the first age.—Remarks upon its
 diseases.—The mucous and lachrymal glands are the most frequently in
 action in infancy.                                                  244




 III. _State of this System after Growth._

 Period of puberty.—Its influence upon the glands.—Influence of the
 glands of digestion at the adult age.                               247


 IV. _State of this System in old Age._

 Of the change in the texture of the glands from the effect of
 age.—Many glands still secrete much fluid in old age.—Relation of this
 phenomenon with nutrition.                                          249


 DERMOID SYSTEM.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 FORMS OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.


 I. _External Surface of the Dermoid System._

 Various folds of this surface.—Their different nature.              254


 II. _Internal Surface of the Dermoid System._

 Its relations.—Absence of the fleshy pannicle in man.—Consequences. 256


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.


 I. _Texture peculiar to the Organization._

 _Chorion._—Its thickness in the different regions.—Its
 structure.—Method of seeing it.—Variety of this structure according
 to the regions.—Small spaces of the chorion.—Fibres.—Their nature.—It
 approximates that of the fibrous texture.—Yet it differs from it.—The
 chorion is foreign to the functions of the skin relative to animal and
 organic life.                                                       258

 _Of the reticular body._—Idea that has been formed of it.—What
 it is.—Vascular net-work.—Colouring substance.—Analogy among the
 diversity of races.—How this diversity should be considered.—Of the
 cases in which the blood enters the reticular body.—Singular property
 of the vessels of the face of receiving more than the others.—Cause of
 this phenomenon.—Triple means of expression of the passions.—Relation
 between the tendency of the facial capillary system to receive blood
 and diseases.—Double state of the reticular body.—Phenomena at the
 instant of death.—Experiments.                                      266

 _Papillæ._—Situations.—The cutaneous prominences must not be taken
 for them.—Experiments to prove the nature of these prominences.—Their
 varieties.—Forms and nervous structure of the papillæ.              273

 _Action of different bodies upon the dermoid texture._              276

 _Action of light._—Men whiten like plants.—Examples. _ib._

 _Action of caloric._—Effects which it produces on the skin during life
 according to its different degrees.—Effect of cold.—General remarks
 upon gangrene and antiseptics.—False opinions of authors.           277

 _Action of the air._—Remarks upon the influence of this fluid upon
 the evaporation of the transpiration.—It is foreign to this function
 itself.—Desiccation of the skin by the air.—Its putrefaction.       282

 _Action of water._—General uses of baths.—Their use is
 natural.—Maceration of the skin.—Pulpy state.—Stewing of the
 skin.—Mode of horny hardening.—Vesicles that arise the instant it
 takes place.—Other phenomena of stewing.                            285

 _Action of the acids, alkalies, and other substances._—Various
 experiments with reagents.—Remarks.                                 290


 II. _Parts common to the Organization of the Dermoid System._

 _Cellular texture._—Manner in which it is distributed.—Remarks upon
 biles.—Sometimes it is wholly destroyed.—Appearance which the skin
 then has.—Remarks upon leucophlegmasia.                             291

 _Blood vessels._—Manner in which they are distributed.—Dilatation of
 the veins in some cases.                                            293

 _Nerves._—Mode of their distribution.                               294


 _Absorbents._—Proofs of cutaneous absorption.—Absorption of
 virus.—Table of this absorption.—Varieties it experiences.—Absorption
 of medicines.—Experiments.—Character of irregularity of the cutaneous
 absorptions.—To what this character is owing.—Influence of weakness on
 this absorption.                                                    294

 _Exhalants._—Mode of distribution.—Cutaneous exhalations.—Uncertainty
 of calculations upon this point.—Relation of this exhalation with the
 secretions.—Relation with the pulmonary exhalation.—Experiment upon
 this last exhalation.—Remarks upon the causes of many coughs.—Defect
 of evaporation of the fluid deposited upon the bronchia.—The cutaneous
 exhalants vary.—Are they under the nervous influence?—This does not
 appear probable.                                                    299

 _Sebaceous Glands._—Oily fluid of the skin.—Its quantity.—Its
 varieties.—Its sources.—We have but few data as it regards the
 sebaceous glands.                                                   305


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.


 I. _Properties of Texture._

 They are very evident.—They are often less than they seem to
 be.—Phenomena of extensibility and contractility.                   308

 II. _Vital Properties._

 _Properties of animal life._—Sensibility.—Of the feeling.—Of the
 touch.—Its characters.—Its differences from the other senses.—Seat of
 cutaneous sensibility.—The mode.—Pain peculiar to the skin.—Influence
 of habit upon this sensibility.—Various reflections.—Diminution of the
 cutaneous sensibility.                                              311

 _Properties of organic life._—They are especially organic
 sensibility and insensible contractility.—Phenomena over which they
 preside.—Division of cutaneous diseases.—Excitants of the cutaneous
 organic sensibility.—Sensible organic contractility is but slightly
 apparent.                                                           318

 _Sympathies.—Passive Sympathies._—Different examples and remarks upon
 the sympathies of heat.—General remarks upon the sensations of heat
 and cold.—Influence of sympathies upon the sweat.                   322

 _Active Sympathies._—These sympathies are relative to each of the
 classes of diseases pointed out above.—Various examples.—General
 remarks.                                                            326

 _Characters of the vital properties.—First character.—The
 cutaneous life varies in each region._—Varieties of animal
 sensibility.—Varieties in the organic properties.                   331

 _Second character.—Intermission in one relation, continuity in
 another._—The peculiar life of the skin is intermittent as it respects
 the functions of relation.—Its continuity as it respects its organic
 functions.                                                          332

 _Third character.—Influence of sex._                                333

 _Fourth character.—Influence of temperament._                       334


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE DERMOID SYSTEM.

 I. _State of this System in the Fœtus._

 A gluey covering in the first periods.—Absence of certain wrinkles in
 the fœtus.—Laxity of adhesion.—State of the vital properties of the
 skin of the fœtus.—Its functions at this age.                       335

 II. _State of this System during Growth._

 Sudden revolution at birth.—Entrance of the red blood into the
 skin.—Consequences.—State of the cutaneous vital forces in
 infancy.—State of the cutaneous texture.                            337

 III. _State of the Dermoid System after Growth._

 Increasing proportion of the fibrous substance, and decreasing
 proportion of the gelatinous.—Remark upon the diseases and affections
 of the skin.                                                        341


 IV. _State of the Dermoid System in Old Age._

 State of the cutaneous texture.—Phenomena which arise from it.—State
 of the vital forces.—State of the functions.                        344




 EPIDERMOID SYSTEM.

 General Observations.—Division.                                     349


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 OF THE EXTERNAL EPIDERMIS.


 I. _Forms, Relations with the Dermis, &c._

 Wrinkles.—Pores.—Adhesion to the skin.—Means of destroying this
 adhesion.—Arrangement.                                              350


 II. _Organization, Composition, &c._

 Uniform thickness in most parts.—Remarkable thickness on the foot and
 the hand.—Consequences of this thickness.—Experiments upon the colour
 of negroes.—Epidermoid texture.—Its peculiar nature.—Action of the
 air, water, caloric, the acids, the alkalies, &c. upon the epidermoid
 texture.                                                            353


 III. _Properties._

 Extensibility.—The animal properties are foreign to the epidermis.—It
 appears to be destitute also of organic properties.—Continual
 destruction of the epidermis.—Its reproduction when it is removed.  360


 IV. _Development._

 State of the epidermis in the fœtus, the adult and the old person.   364


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 INTERNAL EPIDERMIS. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS UPON THIS EPIDERMIS.


 I. _Epidermis of the origin of the Mucous Surfaces._

 It is very distinct.—Proofs of its existence.—Its reproduction.—Its
 nature.                                                             366




 II. _Epidermis of the deep Surfaces._

 Uncertainty of its existence.—Experiments.—Membranes that are
 sometimes thrown off.—It appears that it is not the epidermis.      367


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 OF THE NAILS.


 I. _Form, Extent, Relations, &c._

 Of the habit of cutting the nails.—Anterior, middle and posterior
 portions of the nail.—Superior and inferior surfaces.—Of the texture
 which supports the nail.                                            369


 II. _Organization, Properties, &c._

 Of the laminæ which form the nails.—Of their arrangement.—Their
 analogy with the epidermis.—Obscurity of the vital
 properties.—Facility with which the nails, epidermis, &c. are
 coloured.                                                           373

 _Development._—State of the nails in the fœtus, the adult, and the old
 person.                                                             376


 PILOUS SYSTEM.


 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.


 ARTICLE FIRST.

 EXAMINATION OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM IN THE DIFFERENT REGIONS.


 I. _Pilous System of the Head._

 General observations.                                               379

 _Of the Hair._—Its length, situation, limits, influence on
 physiognomy, variety according to sex, uses, thickness, fundamental
 colours, shades, and influence on temperament.                      381

 _Eyebrows._—Their general arrangement.—Their motions.               386

 _Eyelashes._—Their form, arrangement, &c.                           387

 _Beard._—It is the attribute of the male.—Its relations with
 strength.—Of our habits in relation to the beard.                   388


 II. _Of the Pilous System of the Trunk._

 Its varieties according to the regions.                             390


 III. _Pilous System of the Extremities._

 Its varieties.—It is wanting on the palms of the hands and the soles
 of the feet.                                                      _ib._


 ARTICLE SECOND.

 ORGANIZATION OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _Origin of the Hairs._

 Of the membranous canal which encloses this origin.—Relation of the
 hair with this canal.—Organization of this.—Swelling of the hair and
 its origin.—Its course to the exterior.                             391


 II. _External Covering of the Hairs._

 Analogy of this covering with the epidermis.—Its differences.—Action
 of the different agents upon this covering.—Its external
 arrangement.                                                        394


 III. _Internal Substance of the Hairs._

 We are ignorant of its nature.—Capillaries of the hairs of the
 head.—Their colouring substance.—The internal substance of the hairs
 of the head is essentially subjected to the influence of the vital
 phenomena.—Proof of this assertion.—This distinguishes it from the
 external covering.  396


 ARTICLE THIRD.

 PROPERTIES OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM.

 It undergoes but little horny hardening.—Of curling.—The properties of
 texture slightly marked.—The animal ones are nothing.—The organic are
 a little more evident.                                              401


 ARTICLE FOURTH.

 DEVELOPMENT OF THE PILOUS SYSTEM.


 I. _State of this System in the First Age._

 Of the down of the fœtus.—The growth of the hairs is then the reverse
 of that of the other parts.—Their growth after birth.—Their colours
 are a little deeper in infancy.                                     403


 II. _State of the Pilous System in the following Ages._

 Revolution at puberty.—Of the hairs which then appear.—There are but
 few changes in the following ages.                                  404


 III. _State of the Pilous System in Old Age._

 Of the hairs which die first.—Of the whiteness which they
 then assume.—They grow in this state.—Why.—Do they grow after
 death.—General differences of animate and inanimate bodies in their
 decay.                                                              405


 IV. _Preternatural Development._

 Development upon the mucous surfaces, upon the skin and in cysts.   408

END OF THE THIRD AND LAST VOLUME.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in spelling hyphenation and punctuation remain unchanged, but the use
of ligatures has been standardised.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of General Anatomy, Applied to Physiology
and Medicine, Vol. 3 (of 3), by Xavier Bichat

